Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


8000208730  ^^^^^^B 


* 


$ 


•*•/ 


.• 


rRINTKD  BY  BALI.ANTVKF  ANI>  CPMPA^V 
BDINHIIRGH   ANI>  LONDON 


* 


f 


EOUGH    NOTES 


OP 


JOURNEYS  MADE   IN  THE  TEARS 

1868,  '69,  70,  71,  72,   &  73 


IN  SYRIA,  DOWN  THE  TIGRIS, 
LVniA,     ICASHMIR,   CEYLON,  JAPAN,   MONGOLIA, 

SIBERIA,  THE  UNITED  STATES, 
Tiri^  SAND  WICH  ISLANDS,  AND  A  USTRALASIA. 


LONDON: 
TRUBNER    &    CO.,    LUDGATE    HILL. 

1875. 
\All  n(fht8  reserved.^ 


* 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

i^ndon — Port  Said — Jenualein—Warren'a  researches— Chief  Goblan-The 
Jordan — Igneous  rocks— Wady  Homara— Bedomns,  their  slaves— Fine 
-Bathe  in  Dead  Sea— Bedouin  farmers— Jerusalem — Bishop  Gobat 
ewiab  oonTersions  ;  their  indolence,  schools — ^Religious  processions — 
Jerenaiali's  grotto— Miraculous  stones— Christian  burial-ground — Cunning 
paaha — American  colony,  a  failure — An  Englishman  awaiting  the  coming 
of     Christ — Description   of  Jaffa— Port  Said— M.    Lesseps- Dredging- 
machines — ^Aden — Mr  Stanley  of  New  York  Herald  waiting  for  Livingstone 
— Subsequent  death  of  Livingstone— Christmas  1868— Bombay     . 


PAOK 


CHAPTER  IL 

Cares  of  Elephanta— New-Tear's  Day— Cotton-mill— A  *'hoph)g*'  Sub,  has 
hard  times- A  jolly  old  ensign— Railway  to  Nagpore— Horse-dawk,  Bul- 
lock-cart—Dak  bungalows — Allahabad— Small  and  large  eggs — Mission- 
house—  Convent  of  nuns— A  young  bishop— Palace  of  Akbar — The  Lingam 
— Festival  on  the  Oanges— Sins  remitted— The  **  "Well  of  Cawnpore  "— 
Horrors  committed  by  Nana  Sahib — Happy  life  of  innkeepers— Lucknow, 
city  of  palaces,  mosques,  and  temples— The  ruined  Residency— Return  to 
Cawnpore— Delhi— The  Jumna  Musjid— Kashmir  gate— The  beautiful 
Kootub  Minar— Curious  pillar  of  iron— Jumpers  into  pool  at  Mehrowlie 
— Hodson  shot  two  sons  of  the  Emperor  of  Delhi — Agra — Mounds  at  Delhi 
and  Jericho— The  Taj — Holy  Benares — Temple  to  Doorga  and  its  500 
monkeys— Burning  dead  on  the  river— Hindoo  theology— Society  at  the 
Victoria  Hotel — Calcutta— Labour  of  women— Hindooism— Christianity 
— "Cool  weather"— Birds— Rain— The  Orissa  famine- Hotels  not  satis- 
factory- No  love  lost  between  Europeans  and  natives— The  *'  stinking 
faasaar"— Bayard  Taylor  on  India     ......        16 


vi  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  III. 


PAOK 


Bangoon,  rice-millB,  large  Buddhist  pagoda,  its  beggiog-boz— Women  tbe 
bread-winnera— MaolmaiD,  not  progressing — ** Novara  Expedition'* — 
B.  P.  S.  N.  Company's  lines  of  steamers— Penang— Tropical  vegetation — 
Never  be  too«positive — Malacca,  tin  principal  export— Singapore,  strike 
of  Chinese,  extensive  trade,  many  Germans— Saigon,  the  Chinese  town- 
Large  export  of  rice— French  military  station,  unhealthy — Large  revenue 
on  sale  of  opium— Annamite  indolence— Hong-Kong — ^Flirtationa— The 
Happy  Valley— Chinese  criminals- Canton — Archdeacon  Grey— Temples 
of  the  Genii — Buddhist  monastery  and  nunnery— Gambling — Opium- 
smoking— Restaurant — Tea-divan — Flour-  mills — Jade-shops — Ivory  turn  - 
ing  —  Lacquer — Horn  lanterns  —  Schools  —  Weddings  —  Pawnbrokers- 
Watch-towers— Shops— Police— The  "  willow-pattern  "  plate— Punish- 
ments— ^Provisions — Shoes  for  the  dead — Trades  .  .  .41 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Shanghai — Government  works — Bubbling  well  and  joss-house — Nagasaki, 
pretty  country,  good  roads,  fine  camellias — The  Decima— Tea-factory, 
how  green  tea  is  made — The  town — ^American  missionaries— Japanese,  a 
small  race,  take  easily  to  European  customs — Hiogo — Rice  and  silk — 
Wheat-lands — Osaka,  good  hotels,  ponies — Tycoon's  castle — Pear  and 
peach  orchards— Buddhist  temple,  huge  stone  tortoise,  priests — Feast  of 
the  disciples — Cemeteries — Trades— Fine  temple— Yokohama,  ourio-shops 
— Teddo,  travelling  in  sedans,  good  hotel — Japanese-like  English  dinner— 
Dr  Willis's  hospital— Temple  of  Aidsa — Large  temple  of  Asaxas,  its  plea- 
sure-grounds—Tycoon's palace — O.  G.  temple — ^Tea-gardens— Nurseries — 
Sheba  temple — Houses  of  wood  and  paper— Burial-place  of  the  forty- 
seven  Lonins,  assassins  of  the  Mikado — Hara  Kiri — Sheba  temple,  burial- 
place  of  Tycoons— Social  evil  establishment  rented  by  Government— 
Palaces  of  Daimios— Canals — Yokohama— Ashewarra— Temple  of  Dai- 
boots— The  largest  bronze  head  in  the  world — Tea-houses — Holy  ponies — 
Fine  scenery — Rice-grounds — ^Trees  and  flowers— Salt — Kamakura,  the 
most  sacred  temple— Buddha's  sword — Sudden  changes  of  weather— Resi- 
dence of  foreigners — Leave  for  Shanghai,  nearly  wrecked  nt  night  on 
Rock  Island     .........        65 

CHAPTER  V. 

Prepare  to  cross  Mongolia— Shanghai,  quaint  old  place,  dirty— Jugglers — 
Gamblers— To  Tientsin  in  steamer — Telegraph  to  Kiachta,  then  by 
Grant's  pony-express— Cheefoo,  the  filthiest  place  in  China— Land  en- 
croaching on  the  sea— Taku  forts— Author  misses  Mr  Grant— Pekin— 
Wang's  Hotel— Observatory — Temples,  that  to  Confucius- Lamesaries— 
Image  of  Buddha— Trades— Carts  without  springs— Much  misery- 
Women  with  small  feet— Passports— Leave  Pekin  ....        88 


COJS/TENTS.  vii 


CHAPTER  VI. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

LeaTe  Kiachta  in  carriage  and  post-horses — River  Selenga,  floating  bridge — 
Villages,  catUe,  horses,  pastures — Rapid  driying—Ilyenski— Priest  and 
begging-box — Pasoilske  on  Lake  Baikal,  fine  herrings— Steamer  to  Listni 
Nigni— Polish  exiles  returning  from  forced  labour  in  the  mines,  now 
called  '*  colonists  "—Great  trade  from  China,  but  much  now  goes  by  sea 
—Lake  Baikal— Snow  on  hills— L-kutsk,  the  Amoor  Hotel— Polish  exiles 
(of  1866)  ;  M.  O.,  a  "colonist,"  among  them— Tanning— Liquor  distilled 
by  the  birch  gives  odour  to  Russian  leather — Residence  of  the  Governor- 
General  of  East  Siberia—  Plain  covered  with  flowers — Forests — Macadamis- 
ing roads — Forests  of  cedar,  pine,  birch — Villages — Telegraph  wire  being 
carried  to  the  river  Amoor  and  port  of  Pasiette,  extend  to  Shanghai — 
Dense  forests — Much  house,  boat,  and  bridge  buildiDg— Horses  and  cattle 
— Nigne  Udinskia  on  river  Ida— Exiles  from  Russia- Tea-caravan — 
Tomskia  three  miles  long— Good  roads,  drunken  driver— Large  rats  — 
Crossed  the  Kansk- Rebinskia- Interesting  flora— Yenisei  river— Fine 
scenery — Krasnoizarsk,  gold  mines,  bank,  information  about  the  country, 
resources- Erroneous  ideas  about  Siberia — Population  and  enterprise 
wanted,  rich  black  soil— Magnificent  flora— Larger  villages — Much  grain 
— Droves  of  horses— No  kitchen-gardens— Flora  diminishing— Storm— 


I'AGE 


Pekin  to  Kiachta— Seeguash,  eat  with  chopsticks—  Pcltctl  by  boys— Country 
well  cultivated— Nankow  Pass,  bad  roads— Inner  Wall  of  China — Sba-tow 
— Sha-chung — Hwai-lai-hien,  bridge — River  Tangho — Grandfathers  only 
allowed  to  wear  beards— Temperance  r.  drunkenness—  Suen-wha-fu— Irri- 
gation— Coals — ^Ealgan— Author  comes  up  with  Mr  Grvaii— Entrepot  be- 
tween Russiaand  China— Population  of  Chinese  and  Mongols,  few  Russians 
— Hie  Great  Wall— Dust-storm— Tauist  temple — Leave  with  carts,  horses, 
and  camels — Temple  of  Daban — Youart  (tent)  and  temple — Mongols  — 
Lakes— Mounds  of   stone — Chaxar  tribes— Child  offered  for  sale— No 
herbage  —  Lake    Boro — Steppe  —  Mongols  superstitious — Lakes — Sand 
mounds- The  only  milestone — Antelopes — Borulgen  Well—  Iren  Salt  Lake 
—  Desert  of  Gobi— Dust-storm  —  Ehalkhas  territory  —  Oude  —  Touarts, 
flocks  and  herds— Russian  i)ost— Mongols  are  all  beggars— Pass  Chinese 
carts— Tarachi  (well) — Author  has  to  take  to  a  camel,  nothing  for  them 
to  eat — Darkin  Mountain— Steppe — Rain — Frost— Lama  Mandarin  sets 
praying-machine  to  work — ToUa  river — Urga,  headquarters  of  Lamas — 
Russian  Consul — ^Procure  a  praying-box— Chinese  encampment— Cross  the 
Iro  river— Arrive  at  Kiachta — Dinner  with  celebrities,  customs— Great 
depot  between  Russia  and  China — Gold  mines — Cossacks— Vegetation — 
Climate  same  as  Canada — Hospitality— Gost-Keeran,  rich  churches- 
Pigeons  not  killed— Enterprise  repressed  by  Russians— Circus  going  to 
Pekin— Lama  King  of  the  Mongols,  mode  of  finding  .95 


viii  CONTENTS. 


PAGR 


Great  traffic  on  road— Tomsk,  capital  of  West  Siberia,  many  rich  people, 
mines,  frequent  failures,  ague,  honey-farms — Erroneous  opinion  about 
the  country— Price  of  horses— Population  wanted— Ejules- Churches— 
The  land  caxpeted  with  flowers— Steamer  for  Tumen         .  .  .      123 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Driftwood — Precautions  against  escape  of  exiles— Fishing-villages — Birch- 
wood  fuel— Hailstorm— Eternal  card-playing — Biver  Irtish — Birds— A 
seal — Farms — Tobolsk  —  A  Polish  gentleman  amnestied  —  Bugs  — The 
bishop— On  the  road  again — ^Tumen— Corduroy  roads— Crops  of  rye,  oats, 
barley— Thriving  villages-Passports— Polish  exiles— Criminals — Treat- 
ment of  exiles — **  Colonists,"  their  occupations — Tauineries — "Wardropper's 
(a  Scotchman)  manufactory- Tartar  town— Salmon — ^Windmills— Yeka- 
terinburg—Mr  Tate,  engineer— €k)ld  mines— Mr  'Wilkinson  in  charge  of 
cotton-mills — Paper-mills — Ironworks — Great  wealth  in  gold,  silver,  iron, 
and  copper  of  the  Ural — ^Mint— Gold  mines  of  Berezov — Abolition  of  serf- 
dom— Population— Tarantas — Divisorial  line  between  Asia  and  Europe — 
Russian  Church  invented  Purgatory  in  1853— Lines  of  exiles,  men, 
women,  and  children — Underground  caverns — Perm — On  board  the 
Permeaft— Good  larder — "Warm  weather — Steamboat  company — Pine 
woods — Russian  peculiarities — Polite  beggars — ^Fish  abundant,  potatoes, 
not  much  fruit — Boots,  no  shoes — Cucumbers,  staple  food  of  Russians— 
The  Volga — Nigne-Novgorod,  the  great  fair— To  Moscow  by  train- 
Vladimir — Old  mode  of  ablution— The  Kremlin,  the  Saviour's  Gate, 
churches,  monasteries,  military  works,  artillery,  large  cannon,  great  bell, 
— crown  jewels- Fine  view  of  city— St  Petersburg  ,  .        142 

CHAPTER  IX. 

United  States — Kentucky  caves— Saltpetre  collected— fish  and  animalu — 
Proctor's  Cave— Chicago— Salt  Lake  City— Railway — Mormons — Argu- 
ment for  plurality  of  wives — History  of  Mormonism — Brigham  Young — 
Hamilton — Silver  mines,  their  wealth— Sacramento — San  Francisco — 
Yosemite  valley — Big  trees — Sculptured  granite — Calaveras— Big  Trees- 
Grisly  bear  attacks  sheep — Mrs  Parker— Sequoia  and  other  trees— Age  of 
trees— Forest  Fires — Geysers— Fruitful  Napa  valley— Quicksilver  mines- 
Irrigation  by  artesian  wells— The  mint       .  .  .  .  .171 

CHAPTER  X. 

San  Fraucisco  to  Sandwich  Islands— Honolulu— Hawaii— Kanaka  women— 
Pali  precipice — ^Volcanic  ridges— Taro  and  sugar  plantations— No  pot,  no 
man— Roving  missionaries— Hilo— The  Duke  of  Edinburgh— No  rum 
allowed  to  be  made — One-sided  laws— Co£fee  and  ailk  abundant— No  more 
sandal-wood—  Great  decrease  in  population,  the  oauses — Volctno— Kilauea 
Inn,  the  crater,  description  of  Pele's  hair--«Maana  Loa— Singing  birds— 


CONTENTS,  ix 


PAQB 


Descripiioii  of  enter,  eruption  of  1868 — Trees — Captain  Cook — Natives, 
their  rapid  deereaae— Increaae  of  foreigners,  half-castes,  and  Chinese — 
Goyemment  monarchical— Taxes — Social  evil —Causes  of  native  depopu- 
Uttion — NatiTes  "thoroughly  demoralised*' — Sad  picture  in  1862,  worse 
now — Missionaries  in  great  numbers — Natives  may  have  been  taught 
religion,  but  are  not  moral— Missionaries  rich  in  lands,  flocks,  &c.— People 
in  power  are  Americans— Bevenue  and  expenditure  .  .        203 

CHAPTER  XI. 

New    Zealand — Auckland— Grahamstown— Gold   mines— "Wages— Too  many 
drinking-places — Strong  men — Fresh-looking  women — Delicious  climate 
— Volcano  of  Tongarero  —  New  Plymouth  —  Nelson — Birds — Animals — 
Church  and  chapel — Vegetation— Pictou  gold  mines— Wellington— The 
Govemor*s  hairdresser-  Hutt  valley— Wages— Maories—"  How-How  *' — 
The  religion  of  the  men — ^Natives  fast  dying  out— Causes — Christchurch— 
Blunt  clergyman — ^Aurora  Australia — Museum — Trout-hatching— Skele- 
tons of  extinct  birds — Wool-washing — Flax-miUs— Immigrants  wanted — 
Artesian  wells — Southern  Alps — Farms  and  sheep-runs—  Eels — Whitebait 
— Forests— Gold-diggers  of   Hokitika— Waimea  and  Canary  diggings- 
Plymouth  Brethren — Jade    found — California  (Chinese)  pump— Rivers 
become  torrents — Fine  farm,  prize  bull  and  ram,  sheep  cheap— Bound  for 
Melbourne — Oamaru  rich  in    grain    and  wool— Dunedin — Scotch    Free 
Church— Rich  gold  mines— Fine  lands -Bail  way  ....        228 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Melbourne— Geelong—ljaunceston—Hobart  Town — Rail  and  tram— Sykes, 
the  Torkshireman— Van  Diemen*s  Land  Company— Forests— Penguin 
silver  mine — Penguins — Good  lands  heavily  timbered — Hampshire  Hills 
— Walaby  steaks — Badgers  —  Hyenas— Surrey  Hills— Opossums— Kan- 
garoos—Middlesex  Plains — Gad*s  Hill — Mersey — Bail  to  Launceston — 
Gold  mines  at  Nine-Mile  Springs — Industry  gold  mines — Racecourse — 
Black  Boy  mines— Description  of  Hobart  Town— Hobart,  Golden  Gate, 
and  other  mines — Farming  depressed  in  Tasmania — Melbourne —Meat- 
caring  works — Railway — The  stinking  Tarra— Califomians  should  have 
Tasmania- Ballarat — Pay-dirt — Clunes  gold  mines — Stinking  factories  at 
Melbourne — Vested  rights — Heavy  protection  duties— Sydney,  descrip- 
tion of— Newcastle  collieries — ^Paddy's  Market  at  Melbourne — Launceston 
— Railway  opened— Excess  of  females  in  Tasmania — Bendigo  and  other 
diggings— GaUe 253 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

Bail  to  Kandy- Coflfee-plantations— Sanatorium — Scenery — Chinchona  doing 
well — Oinnamon-gardens— Revenue— Population— Religions  —  Colombo — 
Coffee-stores— Wages —Bread-fruit   and   other  trees— Cingalese  traders 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 


great  cheats— Sir  E.  Tennant  and  the  elephant— Leave  for  Suez— Aden 
increasing— Passengers— Port  Said— Canal— Dredging -"Will  have  to  be 
widened  by  John  Bull— Revenue  of  canal— Jaffa— Jerusalem— Schools- 
Best  time  to  visit  Jerusalem- Polish  Jews  cultivating— Population  of 
Jerusalem— Alexandria— Marseilles — Home  ....      21H) 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Mont  Cenis  tunnel— Aurora — Jerusalem—  Canon  Tristram  kidnapped,  ransom 
sent— Asphalt  exported— Bayley's  school— Bishop  Gobat's  school— Herod 
gave  Cleopatra  land — Goblan's  encampment— Farmer  Bedouins— Inscrip- 
tion—Dolmens— Hot  springs  of  Callirhoe— Dead  Sea— Mixed  breed  of 
Negroes  and  Arabs— Tell  Rhama,  ruins— Bedouin  tents— Captain  Warren^s 
excavations — Jericho  mounds,  debris  of  brick-kilns— Jerusalem — English 
cemetery,  its  difficulties— Miss  Dickson's  school— Boy  drowned  him- 
self, man  shot  himself— Jaffa— German  colony— Sect  of  the  Temple — 
Destruction  of  English  cemetery — ^Tripoli,  large  orange-groves— Lattalda 
— Aboorico  tobacco — Sun  and  moon  worshippers  in  the  mountains — Ame- 
rican missionaries  there— Iskanderim — Beilan,  native  Protestants— 
Aleppo— Turks  never  repair — Start  for  Diarbekir— Conical  dwellings— 
The  Turks  only  count  men  as  population— The  country  might  be  a 
l)aradise— Abraham  bom  at  Orfa — Holy  fish— Taurus  covered  with  snow 
— Mound  not  yet  excavated— Murillo  beauties— 2%c  Aleppo  huiUm^  a 
large  scabby  sore— Daily  routine,  food  cheap — Turkish  khan— Tempest— 
With  the  Khurds — Nothing  to  eat,  coaxed  the  women  and  got  plenty — 
Diarbekir  on  the  Tigris,  once  a  formidable  place — Boys*  school  —  No 
money-changer,  no  bank,  no  newspaper,  filthy  gullies  in  streets — Russian 
Consul-  People  slaves,  officials  rogues,  electric  telegraph  little  used— Pre- 
pare to  descend  the  Tigris  on  a  skin  kdlik — Yankee  muskets— Russian 
Consul  offends  Turks  by  entering  the  mosque  with  boots  on— Aleppo 
button,  how  caused     ........       311 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Leave  Diarbekir  in  a  4:e/^iit— Description  of —Provisions  in  plenty  on  the  Tigris 
— Ducks,  plover,  pigeons,  hawks,  stork,  blackbird,  nightingale— High 
limestone  cliffs — Rapids — Beauty  of  scenery- Stone  tombs  turned  into 
villages— Rapids  not  so  harmless — Jecireh  Ibu  Omar — Basaar  for  pur- 
chase of  goat*s  hair— Two  Roman  bridges— The  ridge  on  which  the  ark 
rested — Mountains  with  snow— Arab  raids— Deserted  villages — Women 
tattooed—  Kdlik  nearly  wrecked— Mosul— The  Consul,  BIr  Rassam,  takes 
us  in — Handsome  house— He  is  translating  the  Hebrew  Bible  into  Arabic- 
Arrange  for  another  k-dfik—'blT  Layard*s  labours  at  Nineveh— Sculptures 
remaining — ^Pasha  buys  his  appointment— Duties— Rain — Distant  moun- 
tains covered  with  snow— The  Pasha  and  head  of  customs  only  thrive — 
Thunderstorm- Creaking  wheels  drawing  water— Islands  in  the  river— 


CONTENTS.  xi 

PAOti 

Birds  — Birthplace  of  SalacUn— Bricks  with  Cufio  character—CirculAr  hoats 
— ^Wonutn  Bwimi  off  to  supply  hutter,  &c— River  very  muddy— Origin  of 
date-trees  here— Bagdad — ^The  khan  veiy  dirty,  cook-shops  filthy — Our 
Consul  lodges  us — Nebuchadnezzar  and  the  golden  calf — Babylon— Oale 
of  dust— Network  of  ancient  canals— Railways  wanted — Babel— Rich  and 
Layard — Skeletons — lion  cut  out  of  limestone — A  saint's  tomb— Roast- 
ingly  hot— Funeral— Birs  Nimroud,  its  destruction — ^Tomb  of  Prophet 
Bsekiel— The  Kasr  of  Rich — ^The  ancient  tree  Athel6— Bagdad — Ruins 
of  Akarkouff,  has  no  history— Sand-storm — The  Aleppo  buUon  called  the 
date-mark — Vaccination  for   .  .341 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

Leave  in  steamer— Qity  of  Silucia— Arch  of  Ctesiphon — Tigris  and  Euphrates 
Steam  Navigation  Co. — Passengers,  Arabs,  Persians,  and  Jews — ^Turkish 
Government  steamers— Alexander's  Bridge — Arab  corpse — Buffalo,  horses, 
sheep,  and  goats  — Capital  required  to  make  850  miles  of  railway— Tomb 
of  Ezra — Land  Jewish  pilgrims^Wild  pigs — Bussorah— The  Garden  of 
Kden — Life  and  property  insecure — City  of  London— T&y  of  employes- 
Comfort  on  board — i?^iopia— Reflections — Too  much  comfort — ^Descrip- 
tion of  Bussorah,  wretched  place— Date-palms— Good  fish— The  saultoun, 
Persian  musical  instrument — Fao,  telegraph  station — ^Rice  and  grain  culti- 
vation— Bushire — Take  in  cotton  and  wool— Manchester  goods — Square 
wind-towers — ^Persia  worse  governed  than  Turkey  ;  they  must  fall — Ex- 
ports and  imports — Curious  fogs — Mount  Gebel  Ginnoh— Bukumarth, 
with  snow — Isle  of  Hormiz— Muscat— Intense  heat— The  Imaum's  resi- 
dence—Exports— Kurrachee,  a  skeleton  city — Railway  to  Eotree  on  the 
Indus,  opposite  Hyderabad    .......      365 

CHAPTER  XVIL 

On  the  Indus  in  steamer— Current  six  knots— Babool  wood  for  fuel — Chattees 
or  floats — Hotter  than  Purgatory— Sea-fish  come  up  to  spawn— River 
three  miles  broad — Heat  from  sandstone  hills  like  hot  blast— Government 
revenue  for  fishing — Pallah  fish— English  v,  natives ;  former  should  know 
better^Temperature  116°— Forests,  herds  of  buffalo,  sugar-cane— Vil- 
lages miserable— Sukkur — Bungalows  a  delusion — Old  minaret ;  legend  ; 
suicides  from  it — Indus  flotilla  laid  up — llfi**  under  awning— Cotton — 
Birds— Passengers,  Hindoos,  Mussulmans,  Parsees,  Christians— Enjoy  a 
bath  in  the  river— Alligators— Enter  the  Punjaub— Lascar  sailors — 
Scinde  men  and  women— River  four  miles  wide— Patience  of  the  crew — 
Chenaub  river — Date-palms — Change  pilots  daily ;  their  mode  of  return- 
ing— Mouth  of  the  Sutleg— Nine-knot  current — Mooltan  and  Lahore 
Railway — Air  laden  with  dust — ^Rail  to  Lahore — Observations  on  board 
steamer — ^Native  crew  looked  upon  as  dirt  by  European  officers — Officer*s 
opinion  of  Lords  Blayo  and  Northbrooke  outrageous — Unjust  treatment 
keeps  up  bad  feeling — The  natives  quiet  and  docile— Murree— Brutality 


xii  CONTENTS, 


PAGI 


towards  the  oAtiTes ;  may  end  in  a  univerBal  outbreak— Hotel  kept  by  a 
European— DiflgUBted,  leare  the  public  gardeni,  menagerie— Goojrat— 
Military  station  of  RawulPindee — Murree  hill  station^PIeaaant  tempera- 
ture— Mist — Kohala,  first  stage  to  Kashmir— Thunderstorm — Hex,  horse- 
chestnut,  and  walnut  trees — Chuttar — Suspension  bridge— Enter  Kash- 
mir— Timber  floated  down— Trees — Gorgeous  butterflies— Himalayas ~ 
The  Jhelum  full  of  fish — Observations  on  the  Jhelura — Ghurr^e — Hard 
lines  for  coolies — Fine  scenery — An  aquatic  Blondin — Trayelling  in 
Kashmir — Human  flesh  counts  for  little  in  India — Chicot^— Author 
dislikes  the  '* quiet**  of  guide-books— Befleotions—Dr  Cumming*s  pro- 
phecies— Thtindalee- Rice  and  cotton  grounds— Deep  gullies  and  high 
hills  —  Road  strewed  with  apricots  —  Fine  views— Trees — B&rramiila — 
Old  Hindoo  temple  of  Bhuniar — Sikh  forts— Valley  of  Kashmir— Guide- 
books incorrect— Noisy  Jhelum  now  placid— Take  to  boat — WuUa  Lake 
— Country  partially  flooded— Homed  cattle  and  horses— Noroo  Canal— 
Shadipore — Sreenuggur  .....  379 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Sreenuggur,  capital  of  Kashmir — Guide-books*  opinions  veiy  flowery — Throne 
of  Solomon — Old  temples — Lingam  with  serpents — Persian  inscriptions — 
Temperature  delightful— Quaint  city — No  wheeled  vehicles — An  officer 
to  take  care  of  foreigners — Great  hospitality  of  the  Maharajah— Free 
bungalows  for  visitors — Four  legalised  routes— Provisions  cheap— Shoot- 
ing, fishing,  and  flirting — Origin  of  Kashmir  shawl-pattern — Well-tim- 
bered land  —  Miles  of  orchards- Pandruttun — Hindoo  temple  —  Shawl- 
shop — The  city  a  jumble  of  houses,  dirty  streets— Hindoo  temples— 
Mosques— The  Government  is  Hindoo— Population,  Mahometans  and 
HiDdoos— Manufactoiy  of  shawls  crowded  and  stinking— New  basaar— 
Works  in  gold  and  silver — Labour  cheap — Fort  Hurri  Purbut— Apple- 
tree  Canal — Ruins  of  the  Akhom— Shah  Hamsa— Rock  dedicated  to 
Viihnu— Great  mosque  of  Shah  Jehan — Old  ruins—Dul  or  City  Lake- 
Lotus  and  other  plants  in  flower — Shawl-washing— Kraleegur  built  on 
islands — Ruined  mosque— Tomb — Floating  gardens  of  melons  and  cucum- 
bers—Husrutbal  ;  the  mosque  has  a  hair  of  the  Prophet's  beard— Grove 
of  plane-trees  —  Shalimar  Baj^  gardens  —  The  senana — Nusseb  Bsgh 
gardens— Wonderful  tree  vegetation— Origin  of  the  valley— No  rice,  no 
man— The  Badsh&h  the  noblest  ruin  in  the  city— The  Maharajah  owns  all 
the  land ;  lets  for  cultivation,  and  gets  lion*s  share — He  turns  tombs  of 
his  predecessors  into  storehouses— Old  mosque  going  to  ruin — Cater- 
pillars turned  into  wood— New  palace — Ruins — Statues — ^Lingam— A 
word  to  the  "  weather-wise '*— Mr  Ghusher— Great  flea  nation— The 
MuBJid  built  by  Nourmahal,  the  Light  of  the  Harem,  now  a  rice-store- 
Mahometan  mosques  turned  into  bams  by  Hindoos— Manusbul  Lake ;  very 
large  lotus— Ruins  of  palace,  garden,  and  temple — ^The  fakir  preparing 
his  grave— Palhallan  to  Gulmurg  on  ponies— Pitched  tent— Visitors*  tents 
on  the  hills— Sanatorium— Description  in  guide-books,  author*8  descrip- 


CONTENTS.  xiii 

PAOE 

tion— English  Church,  chaplain,  doctor,  and  commissioner  under  Indian 
GoTemment— Brown  and  black  bears —Himalayas,  noble  scenery— Bad 
weather— no  church,  no  bell,  but  fowling-piece  fired— Birds— A  gleam 
of  iunahine — Grave  for  a  white  child  near  author's  tent— Funeral— Post- 
man—Magam — Tree  with  three  legs— Magnificent  trees— The  Kashmirian, 
his  character  by  Moorcroft ;  by  author— The  present  Maharajah  a  humane 
man— Fierce  storm— No  fleaa— Cholera—  Barley-treading  by  oxen— Colonel 
Gardner — Islamabad— Iron  mines  of  Ch^ — Smelting  -  furnaces— Pundo 
ruins— Cheap  potteiy — Meat,  best  hind-quarters— Hindoo  temple  and 
liingams — Bronze  god— Bronze  bull— Great  ruin  of  Mattun— Holy  spring 
of  Kashmir — Holy  fish— Pilgrims— Garden  of  Sirkari— Noisy  women,  not 
very  lovely;  dress,  ornaments — Rent  of  fishing-ground — Hindoo  story — 
Springs  at  Aitchibul— Caves  of  Bhoomjoo ;  myriads  of  bats— Temple  and 
lingam— Islamabad ;  cholera  very  bad ;  prayers  ordered— Duty  paid  on 
ihawU — Army — Doongah,  or  traveller's  boat ;  other  boats— Death  of  the 
Kotwal's  wife  of  cholera— Flooded  paddy-fields— Road  lined  with  pear 
sod  apple  trees — Aliabad  Serai— Fine  scenery — Limestone  hills— Bar- 
nmgula  in  dominion  of  Rajah  Motee  Sing— Thunua  Mundi- Bullocks 
laden  with  salt  for  Kashmir— Temple  and  Lingam— Rampore— Leaving 
Kashmir — Found  money-changer— Cemetery  of  native  kings- Thunder- 
storm-Chungus— DiflSculty  in  road— Mogul  serai — River  Tawi — "Workers 
in  gold  and  silver— Road  lined  with  pomegranates— Coolies  unsatisfactoiy 
— Sardabad — Bhimbur,  last  stage  in  Kashmir— Transfer  of  Kashmir  to 
the  Maharajah  Golab  Sing      .......      411 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

British  India— Goojrat— To  Lahore  by  horse-dak— Good  roads— Train  for 
Delhi — Present  carriages  not  suited  to  India— Umballah-Kalka-Simlah 
—Magnetic  observatory— Postman- Church — Police  occurrence— Cholera 
levere — Art-Union  opened  by  Lord  Northbrook— Government  posting — 
Delhi—  "  Pegging  **  too  much  for  health — Kick  and  cuff  servants— Public 
notice  as  to  how  they  are  to  behave — Our  holding  India  depends  on  the 
army — Hatred  of  the  natives— Kootub  Minar,  highest  pillar  in  the  world 
—Divers  at  Mehrowlie  Well— Siege  of  Delhi,  1857-Fero2  Shah's  piUar— 
Birds  nor  smaller  animals  molested— Women  wear  the  breeches— Fine 
men— The  law  at  least  protects  natives— Museum— Museum  at  Victoria — 
The  Queen's  Gardens— Menagerie — Agra— The  Taj— Bombay;  drunken 
Englishmen— Theological  views  of  native  doctor— Missionaries  do  good 
through  schools — Some  Hindoos  become  Christians  to  eat  meat — The 
fakir;  suspended  animation— Deism  among  Hindoos — The  weaver-bird — . 
Tenacity  of  Hindoos  as  to  caste         ......      466 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Bound  to  China  and  Japan— Galle—Penang— John  Chinaman— The  fruit  that 
tempted  Eve— The  Dutch  cultivate  tobacco  and  nutmegs  in  Sumatra- 
Singapore  ~  Good  hotel— Rajah  Brooke— Malays  plucky  policemen— 


xiv  CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Shells— Hong-Kong— Canton ;  river  alive  with  boats— Honau ;  sacred  pigs 
— Buddhist  and  Catholic  priests — Visit  old  and  new  cities — Jade,  its 
great  price— Taste  for  jade  in  New  Zealand — Archdeacon  Grey  preaches 
— Author*s  servant  a  convert ;  often  drank — Depopulation  of  the  Sand- 
wich Islands— City  side  of  river — Execution  ground— Water-dock — Sleep- 
ing figure  of  Buddha —Opium  saloon— Kice-paper  painting— Mosque— 
Bows  and  arrows ;  instruction  by  a  Tartar— Gardens — Duck  and  chicken 
hatching — Dwarfed  fruit-trees— Sedan-chairs  -Great  care  taken  of  ordure 
—Public  cabinets— Fortune-telling  shops— French  cathedral— Sharman, 
residence  of  foreignera  -British  Consulate — On  board  steamer  for  Hong- 
Kong— How  live  fish  are  conveyed  by  steamer— Fish  hatched  in  ponds — 
Hong-Kong  a  fine  town — Pigeon  English — ^The  English  do  not  learn 
Chinese — Leave  for  Japan — Chang  the  Giant,  his  history — Volcano  of 
Imoya— Yokohama — Fusiyama— Leave  for  interior— Hundreds  of  ginrick- 
shas  drawn  by  one  man — Beggars— Laden  ponies  with  straw  shoes— Tea- 
houses —  Heaps  of  children  —  At&mi  —  Hot  sulphur-baths  —  Temples — 
Period  of  transformation  in  Japan  —  Lake  Hakoili  —  Noble  trees  of 
cryptomoria — Temple  of  Shangnani— Forests  of  bamboo  and  long  grass 
— Ice— Boiling  springs — Earthquake— Paper-tree-Sir  R.  Alcock's  dog 
Toby — ^Fusiyama — Hatta — Snow— Pass  of  Atome  Tonge — Adawarra — 
Hot  mineral-springs — Fairy-like  scene — Buddhist  temple— Mineral  baths 
— Soil  volcanic— Daimio's  castle  in  ruins— Orange  groves— Swashbucklers 
— ^The  everlasting  baby — Villages— Winnowing  com — Carried  in  ginrick- 
shsa-Fugishawa-Buddhisttemple— Coined  money  honrde<l—Papermoney 
—Return  to  Yokohama  .......      402 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

Yokohama  —To  Yeddoby  rail— Exhibition  of  articles  sent  to  Vienna — Pottery 
— Refining  gold  and  silver- European  innovations— A  new  calendar — 
Euroi)oan  dress— Railwiiy  satisfactorily  managed — Yeddo — Japanese  go 
the  "whole  hog"— Rabbit  mania— Amusements— Houses  of  wood  and 
paper— Fire-proof  mud  godowns — A  temple  feast-day— Pay  and  pray— 
Mikado's  lev^e;  all  in  European  costume  —  Asazss  — Sale  of  printed 
morality— Nursery  gardens— Daimio's  residence,  now  a  college — Fate  of 
the  Daimios — Hospital  and  School  of  Medicine  once  a  Daimio's  harem 
— Disseoting-room — Headless  bodies  for  dissection —Burial-ground  of 
Tycoons— New  police— Sheba,  one  of  the  principal  temples— Execution 
ground— Keeping  deities  awake — Oodxee,  composed  of  temples,  tea- 
houses, dancing  saloons  —  Vegetation  —  Theatre  —  Pillar-boxes  —  Post- 
office — Steamer  to  Kobe — Tea-firing  described — Gypsum  and  Prussian 
blue  for  making  green  tea — Japanese  tea  sent  to  America— Waterfalls — 
Sintoo  temple— Priests  do  all  the  praying — Robbing  three  hundred 
dollars,  death — Osaka — The  mint — Hoarding  coin — Paper  money— Assay- 
ing—Automaton  weighing-machine — Finest  castle  in  Japan— Pagoda- 
Funeral— Execution  ground— Waxwork  exhibition— Dandng-girls— Kobe 


CONTENTS,  XV 

P.VO  K 

wmx-trees—Lacqner-trees—Elzports— Tea-firing— Boming  hodion—Oalley 
of  hurnt  steamer — Rice  —  Inland  sea  —  Amoy  —  Hong-Kong  —  Macao — 
Kidnapping  ooollet  —  Electrical  spiritoaliBm  —  Saigon  —  Protestant  and 
Catholic  miMionariei— Their  different  saccess— Singapore — Bound  for 
Galle     ..........       524 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

Gsdle— Babel  of  tonguea—Trip  in  steamer  round  Ceylon— Trincomalee— 
Jaffna— Paumber  Pass— Information  for  Darwin— Colombo— Breakwater 
in  prospective — Protestant  and  Catholic  missionaries ;  the  latter  more 
miccessful— Galle  a  walled  town— Elephants — To  Melbourne— Death  on 
board— King  George*s  Sound — Albany— Natives— Convicts — Mixture  of 
]»aisengers— Tasmania— Van  Diemen's  Land  Company^s  property — Tin 
mines— Tramway — Hobart  Town— New  Norfolk— Salmon  ponds — Nine 
Mile  Springs— Iron  mines — Melbourne— Sandhurst — Gambling  in  gold 
claims— Beading  of  Dickens  by  Baptist  minister  — Picture  Gallery— Fits- 
roy  Gardens— Wamambool—Kich  soil— Farming— Wages — Tower  Hill  — 
Lake  eels— Geelong— Squatters  the  lords  of  the  soil— Detrimental  to 
farmers— ** Lags*'— Mils  Turner's  Unitarian  church— Bishop  Perry — 
Legislative  Assembly— University  museum— Meteorite— Bound  for  Galle 
—Lascar  killed— Cabins  crammed  with  cargo — Death  on  board— Aden — 
The  tanks— Passenger  drops  down  dead— Reflections — Bo<ly  consigned  to 
the  deep  at  8  A.M.  ;  a  concert  at  8  p.m.— Suez  Canal— Home         .  5C2 


TRAVELS  IN  PALESTINE,  &c. 


FIRST  TOUR. 

PALESTINE— INDIA— CHINA— JAPAN— MONGOLIA— SIBEEIA- 

ST  PETERSBUBQ. 


CHAPTER  L 

LondoD — Port  Said  —  Jeniialem  —  Warren'a  researoheB  —  Chief  Qoblan  —  The 
Jordan — IgneouB  rocks — Wady  Human — ^Bedouins,  their  alaYee — Fine  views 
— Bathe  in  Dead  Sea — Bedouin  fanners — Jerusalem — Bishop  Qobat — Je?rish 
oonTersions,  their  indolence,  schools — Religious  processions — Jeremiah's 
grotto  —  Miraculous  stones  —  Christian  burial-ground  —  Cunning  pasha — 
American  colony,  a  ^lilure — ^An  Englishman  awaiting  the  coming  of  Christ 
—Description  of  Jaf& — Port  Said,  M.  Lessens — Dredging-machines — Aden, 
Mr  Stanley  of  New  York  Herald  waiting  for  LiTing8tone---Subsequent  death 
of  LiTingstone— Christmas  1868 — Bombay. 

2Qth  October  1868. — Left  London,  crossed  Mont  Cenis  by 
Fell's  railway  to  Susa  and  Torin^  the  next  day  on  to  Brindisi 
and  thence  to  Alexandria,  arriving  there  on  30th.  The 
following  morning  the  first  rain  of  the  season.  Temperature 
76*  Fahrenheit 

^th  November. — Left  in  Egyptian  steamer  for  Jaffa.  Mr 
Gaze's  party,  after  having  paid  their  passage,  frightened  at 
the  weather,  went  overland  by  raU  and  canal  to  Port  Said. 
We  arrived  at  Port  Said  in  twenty-six  hours,  the  distance 
only  160  miles. 

Saw  the  manufacturing  of  artificial  stone  used  in  building 
the  breakwater ;  each  block  of  30  cubic  metres,  composed  of 
two-thirds  sand  and  the  other  third  of  lime  well  ground 
together.  It  takes  two  months  to  harden  before  it  is  fit  for 
mbmersion. 


3  JIER  USALEM'-THE  JORDAN. 

^th — Left  Port  Said,  arriving  at  Jaffa  in  twenty-one  hours, 
135  miles.  At  4.30  p.m.  started  for  Ramleh,  where  we  slept, 
distance  12  miles,  and  the  next  morning  rode  on  to  Jeru- 
salem, reaching  the  Holy  City  at  2.45  p.m.,  distance  about 
28  miles. 

Had  to  wait  at  the  Jaffa  gate,  Jerusalem,  for  our  luggage 
to  come  up,  and  squabbling  with  the  guard  about  passports. 
Passed  our  luggage  through  the  customhouse,  and  put  up 
at  the  Mediterranean  Hotel.  Temperature  66^  Visited 
Bethlehem  and  Solomon's  pools  and  gardens.  Returned  to 
Jerusalem.  Visited  the  tombs  of  the  Judges,  and  explored  the 
excavations  with  Mr  W.  Went  down  close  to  Robinson's 
arch,  80  feet  deep )  the  piers  of  the  arch  uncovered ;  a  large 
tank  disinterred,  25  feet  deep ;  a  watercourse  running  along 
by  the  solid  rock,  forming  the  foxmdation  of  the  Temple  wall, 
cleared  to  a  considerable  extent. 

22rf. — Left  for  Wady  Humara;  arrived  in  the  evening, 
and  pitched  our  tent  at  Jericho.  It  was  rather  warm  as  we 
passed  round  the  base  of  the  Mount  of  Olives  by  the  road 
leading  to  Bethany  (believed  to  have  been  often  trodden  by 
Christ),  but  soon  afterwards  the  sky  became  covered  with 
fleecy  clouds,  through  which  here  and  there  peeped  the  very 
bluest  sky — even  my  dragoman  could  not  but  remark  upon 
its  beauty. 

Goblan  (whom  Mr  Hepworth  Dixon  calls  a  ferocious 
chief)  and  two  of  his  men  are  conducting  us  through  this 
Bedouin  territory.  Our  tent  is  pitched  at  the  foot  of  one  of 
the  Jericho  mounds,  where  the  wild  revelry  of  a  marriage 
feast  is  distinctly  heard.  The  night  bright  and  quiet,  and 
the  mountains  of  Moab,  the  hills  of  Jericho,  and  the  Dead 
Sea  are  all  seen  from  the  entrance  of  my  tent,  each  feature 
of  the  scene  in  turn  having  the  benefit  of  the  moon's  bright- 
ness as  the  fleecy  clouds  slowly  pass  across  her  disk.  Tempera- 
ture 6r,  quite  as  cool  as  in  Jerusalem,  which  is  3500  feet 
higher. 

23c/. — It  was  eight  o'clock  this  morning  before  we  got 
clear  of  Jericho,  and  ten  when  we  reached  the  Jordan.  No 
difficulty  in  crossing,  though  the  water  in  one  part  flowed 
over  the  backs  of  three  or  four  of  the  smaller  horses.  The 
donkeys  were  swam  across.    The  bottom  of  the  river  is  hard. 


JVAI>  Y  HUMARA—AIN  AL  MINE  AH.  3 

At  the  ford,  just  above  the  pilgrims'  bathing-place,  ttie  river 
is  abont  60  yards  wide.  Stopped  to-day  at  2  p.m.,  no 
water  being  forthcoming  farther  on  within  our  reach;  we 
are  a  few  hundred  feet  above  the  valley,  up  towards  the 
mountains  of  Moab.  There  is  a  little  green  about  the  water 
that  flows  scantily  from  a  fissure  in  the  rocks ;  the  spot  is 
called  Ain  el  Hamaide.  Hundreds  of  animals  passed  the 
Jordan  when  we  did — camels,  horses,  mules,  donkeys,  and 
some  homed  cattle.  In  any  civilised  country  such  a  stream 
would  be  spanned  by  a  bridge.  The  river  is  now  at  its 
lowest,  the  end  of  summer ;  it  is  fordable  only  during  a  few 
months  in  the  year. 

24M. — ^After  a  hot  ride  of  six  hours  we  arrived  at  Wady 
Hnmara  and  pitched  our  tents.  Here  no  one  is  seen  but  the 
Hamaide  Bedouin,  with  his  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats,  unless 
occasionally  in  the  spring,  when  the  powerful  tribe  of  the 
Beni  Saki  overruns  the  country  far  and  near  in  search  of 
feed  for  their  numerous  herds  of  camels  and  homed  cattle. 
When  the  sun  shines  upon  Jerusalem,  the  Holy  City  is  clearly 
seen  from  our  camp,  bearing  NNW.  in  a  straight  line  20  to 
25  miles  distant. 

2^tK — My  going  to  Wady  Humara  was  a  special  and  per- 
sonal matter,  and  having  accomplished  what  I  had  to  do  there^ 
I  turned  to  retrace  my  steps  towards  Jerusalem,  taking  Ain 
al  Mineah  in  the  way. 

This  is  a  large  well  in  the  solid  rock,  always  full  bat  never 
overflowing.  A  son  of  the  sheik  of  the  tribe  of  the  district 
was  standing  by  the  fountain,  and  two  negro  girls  filling  skins 
with  water.  Slaves  from  Egypt  are  frequently  found  among 
the  Bedouins.  There  is  an  extensive  view  from  this  foun- 
tain, extending  up  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  which  is  spread 
out  beneath  it  like  a  map.  The  hills  of  Judea  are  seen  in 
the  distance,  and  the  Dead  Sea  almost  to  its  full  extent; 
deep  gorges  and  barren  hills  in  the  foreground,  where  flocks 
of  goats  and  sheep  are  picking  up  a  scanty  subsistence,  and 
the  black  tents  of  the  children  of  Ismael  pitched  pretty  thickly 
around.  We  were  about  3500  feet  above  the  Dead  Sea,  and 
about  1500  above  Wady  Humara.  As  we  came  along,  a 
Bedouin  chief  met  and  stopped  us  to  have  a  letter  read  he 
had  just  received  from  the  governor  of  Jerusalem.    This  chief 


4  BEDOUINS— DEAD  SEA. 

and  his  small  tribe  had  left  their  hereditary  lands  on  the 
west  of  the  Jordan,  and  taken  np  their  quarters  to  the  east 
of  the  Dead  Sea,  to  escape  paying  tribute.  The  governor 
writes  to  the  chief  to  return  to  his  home,  and  to  repair  to 
Jerusalem  and  see  him,  and  that  no  harm  shall  come  to  him, 
ending  his  letter  by  assuring  the  chief  that  he  is  his  brother, 
&a  &c.  This  letter  was  read  aloud  by  my  dragoman  for  the 
edification  of  all  present,  but  more  particularly  for  the  chief 
himself.  Few  Bedouins  have  yet  condescended  to  learn  to 
read  and  write.  The  six  Bedouins  I  ha^e  with  me  have  just 
finished  a  repast  of  roasted  kid ;  kid  they  call  it,  but  it  was 
more  like  an  old  goat.  When  killed,  it  was  found  to  have 
a  young  one  inside ;  and  besides,  I  can  vouch  for  the  part 
sent  to  me  to  have  been  very  touglu  After  their  repast — 
for  which,  of  course,  I  paid — they  showed  off  before  me  both 
in  dancing  and.  singing. 

9  P.M. — 75^  Encamped  at  Ain  Suweimeh,  about  two  miles 
from  the  Dead  Sea,  and  a  little  more  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Jordan^     Caught  half-a-dozen  very  small  fish  in  the  fountain. 

21tL — Took  a  bath  in  the  Dead  Sea;  the  temperature 
about  80®;  very  limpid;  the  bottom  of  gravel  and  small 
stones  until  up  to  the  armpits,  and  then  it  became  slimy 
and  slippery;  the  water  very  buoyant  I  dived,  and  got 
some  water  into  my  eyes,  which  made  them  smart  for  a  few 
minutes.  The  taste  is  bitter.  The  only  difference  I  found 
between  Dead  Sea  water  and  the  water  of  the  Atlantic  is, 
that  the  former  is  considerably  more  buoyant  and  warmer, 
and  somewhat  more  bitter.     My  bath  was  most  pleasant 

From  the  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea  we  wended  our  way 
towards  the  Jordan  ford,  the  depth  being  about  the  same 
as  when  lately  crossed.  We  passed  easily,  though  a  camel 
crossing  just  after  us  was  nearly  swept  down  the  stream. 
It  is  a  long  and  tedious  job  crossing  with  laden  animals,  and 
it  is  a  great  shame  the  Turkish  Government  does  not  build 
a  bridge  at  this  spot  In  the  Jordan  I  washed  off  the  salt 
of  the  Dead  Sea.  Pitched  our  tents  close  to  Ain  Sultan,  in 
the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  what  is  supposed  to  be  the 
site  of  old  Jericho.  Very  good  water  in  a  copious  stream 
fiows  from  this  fountain.  From  a  little  pool  round  about 
the  rock  whence  the  water  springs  a  stream  flows  some  six 


AIN  SULTAN— SPRINGS.  S 

or  seyen  feet  wide,  and  a  foot  deep  in  the  middle.  This 
water  is  consumed  by  the  Jericho  farmers,  none  of  it  ever 
reaching  the  Jordan.  I  found  the  water  everywhere  on  this 
trip  much  more  palatable  than  last  March ;  and  on  inquiring 
of  Groblan,  he  informed  me  that  the  water  was  always  bad 
during  the  summer  months,  and  that  the  Bedouins  did  not 
consider  it  good  until  the  21st  of  November,  and  afterwards 
during  the  winter.  Might  it  not  be  that  the  heavy  rains  of 
winter,  by  washing  into  the  shallow  springs  and  streams  a 
portion  of  the  salts  which  so  generally  abound  in  this  dis- 
trict, render  the  water  impure  by  early  spring  to  such  an 
extent  as  to  require  a  whole  dry  season  to  purify  it  and  render 
it  fit  for  drinking?  This  fountain  where  we  are  encamped 
is  always  good.  It  issues  from  the  foot  of  a  high  mountain, 
and  probably  has  its  source  too  deep  in  the  bowels  of  the 
earth  to  be  injured  by  surface  filtration.  Visited  the  apse  of 
a  church  (Christian)  near  Jericho,  disinterred  last  autumn  by 
Mr  Warren ;  the  walls  have  been  partially  cleared,  and  shows 
the  building  to  have  been  only  18  yards  long  by  7  wide. 

The  farmers  have  commenced  to-day  to  irrigate  their  land 
with  water  from  the  fountain  preparatory  to  beginning  to 
plough.  The  moon  is  nearly  at  the  fiill,  the  sky  clear  of 
clouds,  and  the  temperature  most  pleasant,  about  65^  At 
night  the  chattering  of  the  Bedouins  and  muleteers  had 
ceased,  and  the  former  seen  quietly  stretched  on  the  ground 
around  the  tent,  wrapped  in  their  abbas  or  large  cloaks  wove 
from  goat's  hair  in  broad  black-and-white  stripes.  The  abba 
is  the  Bedouin's  garment  by  night  and  by  day,  and  beneath 
it  he  wears  only  a  long  cotton  shirt — an  awkward  dress,  one 
would  say,  for  a  horseman,  but  they  do  not  seem  to  find  it 
so.  The  bubbling  of  the  fountain  and  the  occasional  cry  of 
the  jackal  are  the  only  sounds  that  now  fall  upon  the  ear  in 
this  valley  of  the  Jordan,  which  once  teemed  with  life,  but 
whose  inhabitants  are  now  few  and  far  between,  a  race  of 
degraded  and  down-trodden  Bedouins,  almost  unacknowledged 
by  the  sterner  and  prouder  tribes  inhabiting  the  eastern  side 
of  the  Jordan. 

29^,  Sunday. — Jerusalem,  went  to  church,  heard  a  con- 
verted Israelite  preach.  Walked  with  Mr  and  Mrs  W.  to 
the  top  of  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  after  having  ascended 


6         MOUNT  OF  OLIVES— FRENCH  PRINCESS. 

the  tower  and  satisfied  ourselves  that  it  was  too  misty  to  see 
any  great  distance,  and  examined  the  print  said  to  be  of 
the  Saviour's  foot  in  stone,  paid  a  visit  to  a  French  princess, 
who  has  just  erected  a  Swiss  cottage,  still  only  half  finished, 
but  in  which  she  resides,  and  alongside  she  is  building  a 
small  church ;  she  has  been  suffering  from  ague ;  she  can- 
not be  less  than  fifty  years  of  age ;  she  made  herself  very 
agreeable,  talked  freely,  and  gave  us  coffee.  It  is  a  queer 
freak  for  a  fashionable  French  princess  to  come  and  take  up 
her  abode  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  where  she  undergoes  such 
discomfort  whilst  attending  to  the  building  of  her  little 
church. 

Visited  the  excavations  at  the  Virgin's  fount  with  Mr  W., 
who  is  following  up  and  clearing  out  a  watercourse  commenc- 
ing down  the  valley  of  the  Kedron,  and  continuing  towards 
the  well  of  Joab  and  the  city.  It  has  been  followed  up  some 
1600  feet  already.  We  passed  through  the  whole  of  the 
passage,  cut  in  the  solid  rock,  and  an  average  height  of 
perhaps  6  feet,  being  9  feet  in  places  and  only  5  feet  in 
other  parts,  the  width  being  about  4  feet  everywhere.  Several 
staircases,  also  in  the  solid  rock  (four  or  five),  have  already 
been  discovered  and  cleared,  leading  from  the  surface  down 
to  the  tunnel  at  equal  distances  apart.  There  is  a  second 
watercourse  leading  almost  across  the  valley  from  the  main 
one,  which  has  not  been  cleared  of  rubbish  to  more  than 
some  20  feet  yet.  It  would  seem  that  these  flights  of 
steps  could  only  have  been  for  the  purpose  of  procuring 
water  from  the  watercourse  for  the  supply  of  a  population, 
living  in  houses  perhaps  covering  the  slopes  of  the  hills  on 
both  sides  of  the  valley. 

2rf  December. — Continuous  rain,  temperature  60\  Saw 
a  saddle  which  had  belonged  to  King  Theodore  of  Magdala, 
priced  at  £100. 

3rf. — Rain  continued,  weather  colder,  temperature  59^ 

Bishop  Gobat  when  last  in  England  stated  the  average 
number  of  conversions  from  Judaism  to  Christianity  to  be 
six  or  seven  a  year ;  well,  this  may  be  the  average,  but  at 
any  rate  within  the  last  two  years  there  have  not  been  more 
than  half  -  a  -  dozen  conversions.  The  Jews  of  to  -  day  are 
what  they  were  of  old,  a  stiff-necked  people ;  they  not  only 


JEWS,  THEIR  CONVERSION  TO  CHRISTIANITY.   7 

refuse  to  become  Christians^  but  they  despise  Christians,  and 
in  all  human  probability,  if  they  had  but  the  power,  they 
would  be  as  intolerant  in  the  use  of  it  as  they  were  1800 
years  aga  There  are  now  about  11,000  of  them  in  Jeru- 
salem, and  their  number  increases  about  500  annually,  whilst 
the  amount  received  from  the  collections  made  for  them  all 
over  Europe  is  yearly  decreasing — still  not  much  short 
of  £30,000  was  received  last  year.  Of  the  whole  11,000, 
three-fourths,  I  am  told,  live  on  charity.  Now  if  this 
increase  in  the  Jewish  population  continues,  and  the  amount 
of  funds  for  their  maintenance  gets  less  every  year,  it  is 
clear  starvation  must  overtake  this  people  sooner  or  later,  if 
they  are  not  made  to  work  for  their  living.  There  is  the 
valley  of  the  Jordan  and  the  plain  of  Sharon  both  close  at 
handy  and  both  requiring  only  the  labour  of  man  to  become 
productive.  Why  not  set  the  Jews  to  work  upon  these 
lands  ?  Why  should  they  be  above  the  lot  of  all  the  people 
in  the  world  ?  Why  should  they  not  be  forced  to  earn  their 
bread  by  the  sweat  of  their  brow  ?  They  do  not  consist  only 
of  old  people  come  here  to  die.  There  is  the  Spanish  por- 
tion, consisting  of  7800,  are  all  natives,  and  3200  Polish.  It 
is  now  400  years  since  the  original  stock  came  here  from 
Spain ;  and  among  the  Polish  and  German  Jews  a  large 
number  are  able-bodied  men  with  strength  to  work.  Is  it 
to  be  tolerated  that  these  1 1 ,000  Jews  should  be  kept  here 
eating  the  bread  of  idleness,  waiting  for  the  coming  of  the 
Messiah  ?  The  first  duty  of  every  man  is  to  earn  his  own 
living ;  let  the  Jews  do  this,  and  they  will  be  in  a  better 
state  to  receive  their  Messiah  when  he  does  come.  Their 
social  state  at  present  is  one  of  great  wretchedness ;  how 
can  it  be  otherwise  when  they  are  living  in  total  idleness  ? 

With  regard  to  the  conversion  of  the  Jews,  it  seems  to  me 
that  the  fact  stated  by  the  bishop— namely,  that  the  conver- 
sions amount  to  only  some  six  or  seven  a  year — shows  a 
necessity  for  a  change  of  tactics.  Neither  the  adult  Jew 
nor  the  adult  Mahometan  will  accept  the  invitation  held  out 
to  them  to  come  into  the  Christian  fold.  Indeed,  I  believe, 
in  this  country  there  is  no  instance  of  a  Mahometan  turning 
Christian.  Experience  shows  that  no  good  can  be  done  by 
endeavouring  to  convert  the  grown  up  of  either  one  sect  or 


8  SCHOOLS— KING  THEODORE. 

the  other.     With  this  fact  before  us,  it  is  clear  that  it*  is 
only  by  educating  the  joigig  that  it  can  be  hoped  to  turn 
Jews  and  MahometaDS  into  Christians.     The  bishop's  school 
at  present  contains  sixty-one  boys,  of  whom  six  are   Jews, 
five  Mahometans,  and  fifty  the  children  of  Europeans,  prin- 
cipally German  tradesmen,  proselytes,  &c.    Of  these  sixty- 
one  children,  forty-one  are  boarders.     Besides  this  school, 
the  Society  for  the  Promoting  of  Christianity  among  the 
Jews  supports   a  school   for   girls,   at   present   under   the 
management  of  Miss  Dixon ;  there  are  twenty-three  girls  in 
this    school,  principally  the  children  of  proselytes.     Then 
there   is  the  school  kept  by  the    German  deaconesses,   in 
which  there  are  eighty  girls.     Besides  these   schools,  there 
are  others  recently  established   by  the   Latin   and    Greek 
Churches.     If  funds  were  applicable  for  the  purpose,  the 
numbers  of  children  above  stated  might  with  ease  be  quad- 
rupled.    Thus  it  seems  to  me  to  be  a  mistake  to  spend  so 
much  money,  to  make  it  the  main  object,  in  the  vain  attempt 
to  convert  Jews  and  Mahometans,  grown-up  people,  instead  of 
increasing  the  number  of  schools,  and  endeavouring  to  gain 
the  end  proposed,  by  more   extensively  sowing  the  seeds  of 
Christianity  and  civilisation  in  the  minds  of  the  young.* 

*  The  DwSLy  Telegraph  of  February  26,  1874,  gives  detaik  of  the  trial  of 
Harris  Eevanski,  aged  sixteen,  a  Russian  Pole,  for  stealing  shirts,  &c,  from  the 
master  of  the  Wanderers'  Home  for  Converting  Jews  to  Christianity. 

Mr  Oppenheim  addressed  the  jury  for  the  prisoner,  and  remarked  that  the  case 
had  been  got  up  by  Dr  Stem,  the  president  of  this  institution,  who  was  the 
gentleman  who  was  captured  by  King  Theodore  in  Abyssinia,  having  gone  there 
to  convert  the  Jews  of  that  country,  but  it  seemed  that  he  could  not  agree  with 
him,  for  he  got  into  a  dispute  with  the  king  as  to  whether  he  was  or  was  not  a 
descendant  of  Queen  Sheba,  which  resulted  in  his  being  put  into  prison.  A  war 
was  then  declared,  which  cost  this  country  nine  millions,  and  addeid  twopence  in 
the  pound  to  the  income-tax.  It  appeared  that  this  society  over  which  he  pre- 
sided  had  not  one  Englishman  amongst  them  ;  but  on  a  certificate  being  given  by 
Br  Stem,  the  poor  and  friendless  were  rescued,  fed,  clothed,  and  lodged,  on  the 
plea  that  they  were  anxious  to  make  inquiries  into  Christianity.  He  had  no 
wish  to  say  one  word  against  the  value  of  an  institution  for  promoting  Chris- 
tianity among  the  Jews,  but  not  long  since  he  remembered  reading  a  letter  in  the 
Timet,  signed  "Vigilans,"  which  idleged  that  eivery  converted  Jew  cost  about 
X7000.  There  was  not  a  tittle  of  evidence  produced,  except  the  finding  of  a 
collar,  of  which  there  might  be  many  thousands  of  the  same  size  and  make. 
Here  was  a  boy  who,  as  a  Polish  Russian  Jew,  had  been  brought  up  in  thai 
faith,  and  it  was  not  easy  for  him  to  throw  ofif  those  early  impressions  he  had 
received  from  his  parents,  and  when  he  saw  a  ceremony  by  which  he  was  invited 
to  become  a  Christian  and  to  renounce  the  religion  he  had  always  adopted, 
it  was  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  he  should  become  frightened  and  run  away. 

The  foreman  said  they  did  not  wish  to  hear  any  more,  and  without  waiting 
for  any  summing-up  of  Uke  judge,  returned  a  verdict  of  not  guilty. 


HOLY  SEPULCHRE— PROCESSIONS.  g 

The  Mahometan  or  the  Jew  can  rarely,  if  ever,  be  made 
a  convert  to  Christianity. 

\tlu — ^There  have  been  three  wet  days,  temperature  59®. 
Went  with  Mr  M.  to  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre, 
and  happened  to  be  there  when  the  evening  procession 
commenced.  First  the  Greeks  (a  score  of  priests,  monks, 
and  dirty  boys)  left  the  Greek  chapel,  singing  and  praying 
at  the  top  of  their  voices,  and  going  the  round  of  all  the 
stations  common  to  all  the  sects,  returning  to  their  own 
chapeL  The  operation  occupies  half  an  hour.  They  are 
closely  followed  (at  intervals  of  ten  minutes)  by  the  Latins 
with  a  similarly-constructed  group,  and  then  the  Armenians 
bring  up  the  rear.  The  three  processions  are  so  close 
together  that  their  singing  and  praying  is  all  heard  at  the 
same  time ;  mixed  up  with  the  noise  made  by  the  carpenters 
working  at  the  dome  of  the  church,  made  a  confused,  unholy 
jumble — ^the  road  which  leads  to  eternal  life  in  the  realms 
of  bliss  I  No  wonder  the  Mahometans  look  on  such  per- 
formances with  scorn  and  contempt. 

Accompanied  Mr  M.  to  the  Boyal  Caverns,  which  are 
nothing  more  nor  less  than  a  quarry,  into  which  one  crawls 
through  a  low  entrance  just  outside  the  Damascus  gate, 
extending  some  200  yards  in  an  easterly  direction  under 
the  city  of  Jerusalem.  It  is  of  various  widths,  and  may 
cover  half  an  acre  of  ground.  Once  inside,  you  have  from 
10  to  15  feet  clear  over  your  head ;  but  the  rubbish  is  very 
considerable,  and  may  extend  downwards  many  yards.  The 
marks  of  the  mason's  chisel  are  everywhere  apparent,  and  in 
many  places  there  are  pieces  of  stone  partly  detached  from 
the  rock,  which  is  limestone.  Stone  sufficient  to  build  the 
present  Jerusalem  twice  over  must  have  been  taken  from 
this  quarry.  On  leaving  these  Royal  Caverns  we  passed 
over  to  Jeremiah's  grotto ;  here  the  entrance  is  defended  by 
a  dervish,  a  man  who  has  been  to  Mecca.  We  had  to  pay 
two  francs  before  this  dragon  would  open  the  door  to  us, 
and  then  we  had  to  wait  a  few  minutes  longer  whilst  the 
females  were  being  hidden  away,  for  this  dervish  lives  in 
this  grotto  with  his  wife  and  children.  This  grotto  is  a 
natural  cave  in  the  limestone  rock  partially  enlarged  by 
artificial  means.     You  enter  it  pretty  nearly  on  a  level  with 


lo  RELICS— LEA  VES  JER  USALEM. 

the  ground  outside.  It  is  more  than  100  yards  in  circum- 
ference, and  above  the  rubbish  there  is  a  height  of  some 
20  feet  Our  dervish  has  ample  room  in  this  grotto  for  his 
family  and  for  his  cattle,  and  the  accommodation  for  both,  for 
this  part  of  the  world,  may  be  considered  good  and  ample. 

From  Jeremiah's  grotto  we  made  the  circuit  of  the  city, 
as  far  round  as  the  Ja£fa  gate,  visiting  David's  tomb  on 
Mount  Zion,  which  is  now  quite  built  in,  and  the  coenaculum 
or  room  in  which  Jesus  with  His  disciples  is  said  to  have 
partaken  of  the  Last  Supper.  We  then  passed  to  the 
Armenian  church,  where  the  spot  is  pointed  out  upon  which 
John  the  Baptist  lost  his  head. 

The  stone  upon  which  Christ  was  laid  after  His  crucifixion 
is  now  here,  after  having  been  stolen  by  the  Latins  and 
carried  to  Bome,  and  brought  back  by  three  angels ;  I 
should  say  it  weighs  many  hundredweights.  There  is  a 
stone  here  also  from  the  Bed  Sea,  another  from  Mount 
Sinai,  and  a  third  from  Mount  Tabor,  for  the  faithful  to  kiss, 
to  save  them  the  trouble  of  going  to  those  far-apart  places. 
The  monks  are  wonderfully  quick  at  gathering  together 
within  a  small  compass  all  the  holy  things  of  this  land  for 
the  benefit  of  the  numerous  pilgrims  who  visit  their  shrines ; 
of  course  all  this  brings  grist  to  their  mill,  but  that,  doubt- 
less, is  a  secondary  consideration  with  this  holy  people. 

Bishop  Gobat  seems  to  have  made  up  his  mind  to  con- 
secrate the  burial-ground  on  1st  January  next,  placing  the 
property  in  the  hands  of  trustees — namely,  the  British  con- 
sul Mr  Moore,  the  incumbent  Dr  Barclay,  and  the  Prussian 
clergyman.* 

\2th. — Left  Jerusalem  for  Jaffa,  to  catch  the  French 
steamer  for  Port  Said  and  Alexandria.  It  blew  a  gale 
from  the  south,  and  rained  heavily,  so  we  had  a  rough 
time  of  it  to  Bamleh. 

IZth. — ^Arrived  at  Jaffa  at  noon.  When  we  got  to  the 
convent  of  Bamleh  yesterday,  we  found  a  French  exploring 
party  that  had  left  Jerusalem  the  day  before  us,  standing 
round  a  fire  endeavouring  to  dry  the  contents  of  their  trunks. 

•  Novmbtr  1874. — The  conaecration  has  not  taken  place,  in  consequence, 
probably,  of  the  opposition  of  Qermans,  and  others  who  do  not  belong  to  the 
forms  of  the  Churdi  of  England. 


WAITING  THE  COMING  OF  CHRIST  ir 

It  seems  that  all  the  members  of  the  party  but  one,  the 
doctor,  arrived  at  the  cODTent  in  the  afternoon  all  right; 
bot  the  doctor  in  his  youth  not  having  applied  himself  to 
equestrian  exercises,  was  a  bad  horseman,  so  he  was  left 
behind  to  come  on  with  the  luggage.  Now  the  pasha 
being  a  cunning  man,  had  gathered  into  one  stream  at  a 
low  point  about  half  a  mile  from  Bamleh  all  the  water  that 
fell  upon  a  considerable  area  of  his  new  road,  and  there  he 
built  a  bridge  to  span  this  stream  which  he  had  accumulated 
there ;  but  not  being  gifted  with  the  bump  of  calculation, 
the  bridge  he  built  with  the  best  intention  served  only  in 
these  heavy  rains  to  block  back  the  stream,  in  place  of 
offering  a  dry  passage  over  it  for  all  comers.  The  doctor 
and  his  luggage  arrived  at  the  pasha's  bridge  a  little  after 
dark,  and  plunging  into  the  stream  to  gain  the  bridge,  missed 
his  footing,  was  thrown  from  his  horse,  and  immediately 
found  himself  holding  on  like  grim  death  to  the  rough 
masonry  of  the  bridge,  with  the  water  in  this  rapid  stream 
up  to  his  chin.  Here  he  remained  incapable  of  doing  more 
than  hold  on  for  dear  life  for  half  an  hour,  when  by  the 
assistance  of  a  muleteer  and  another  he  was  rescued  from 
his  perilous  position.  The  luggage  went  heaven  knows 
where,  and  the  next  morning  it  was  discovered  on  the  wrong 
side  of  the  river,  and  the  owners  of  it  had  to  pay  a  score  of 
honest  people  of  Bamleh  fifty  francs  for  bringing  it  across 
the  water  to  the  convent. 

My  aneroid,  which  I  set  before  leaving  Jerusalem,  shows 
that  city  to  be  2600  feet  above  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  At 
Jaffa  visited  what  is  called  the  American  Colony.  It  con- 
sists now  of  sixteen  persons,  young  and  old,  the  remains  of 
a  much  larger  number  brought  to  this  place,  or  induced  to 
come  to  it  from  Maine,  by  a  Mr  Adams,  a  clergyman  and 
an  enthusiast,  some  three  or  four  years  ago.  Many  have 
died,  and  others  have  returned  to  the  States,  after  having 
lost  all  the  money  they  brought,  after  a  misdirected  and 
ineffectual  attempt  to  cultivate  profitably  the  ground  round 
about  their  houses,  situated  half  a  mile  from  the  town  of 
Jaffa.  There  are  some  seven  or  eight  houses,  including  the 
mission-house  and  church,  and  a  house  being  built  by  an 
Englishman,,  a  Mr  G.  and  his   son,  who  have  set  them- 


12  JAFFA— PORT  SAin—M.  LESSEPS. 

selves  down  here  to  await  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  whilst 
in  Jerusalem  there  are  11,000  idle  Jews  looking  out  for  His 
first  coming,  and  waiting  in  the  hope  and  belief  that 
Jerusalem  will  be  restored  to  them. 

Jaffa  in  fine  weather  has  a  pretty  appearance  from  the  sea, 
coveriDg  apparently  one  sid6  of  a  cone-shaped  hill,  but  the 
illusion  is  dispelled  the  moment  you  land.  The  houses 
are  tumbling  down,  the  streets  mere  crooked  lanes  full  of 
abominations ;  break-neck  places,  stinking  and  full  of  filth ; 
nevertheless,  you  stumble  over,  as  you  pick  your  way  along, 
marble  columns  and  Corinthian  capitals  strewed  pretty 
thickly  about,  the  indications  of  what  Jaffa  once  was.  The 
Mahometan  cemetery,  almost  in  the  town,  contains  many 
fantastic  monuments  to  the  dead,  and  a  shallow  well  supply- 
ing the  neighbourhood  with  water  is  made  in  their  very 
midst  Get  away  from  the  town,  and  the  scene  changes ; 
the  environs  to  a  large  extent  are  orange  and  citron  groves, 
banana  grounds,  and  sugar-cane ;  the  orange  groves,  luxuri- 
ant beyond  anything  one  can  imagine,  at  this  moment  bend- 
ing under  the  weight  of  the  ripening  fruit.  I  bought  four 
fine  oranges  for  a  farthing,  but  six  may  usually  be  had  for 
the  same  money*  Perhaps  the  largest  oranges  in  the  world 
are  grown  at  Jaffa. 

\AtL — Left  in  French  steamer,  arriving  the  following 
morning  at  Port  Said.      Temperature  67°. 

\Qtk.  —  Left  Port  Said  early  for  Ismalia  in  the  little 
postal  steamer,  arriving  in  the  afternoon.  Stopped  to  break- 
fast at  Kantara,  when  M.  Lesseps  arrived  on  his  way 
to  Port  Said,  accompanied  in  his  steamer  by  some  thirty 
ladies  and  gentlemen.  A  good  deal  of  work  had  been  done 
between  Ismalia  and  Port  Said  since  November  1867,  but 
there  is  still  a  deal  to  do  before  any  vessel  drawing  22 
feet  water  can  pass  through  it  In  many  places  there  is 
still  only  6  feet  water,  and  in  a  considerable  extent  of  the 
canal  between  Ferdani  and  El  Quirsh  one-half  of  the  width 
is  still  to  be  dredged  from  the  surface  of  the  water  down- 
wards. M.  Lesseps  cannot  be  in  earnest  when  he  says  the 
canal  from  end  to  end  will  be  open  for  large  vessels  next 
October.  Called  on  our  consul  at  Port  Said ;  he  is  a  Greek, 
I  think,  a  doctor,  and  has  charge  of  an  hospital. 


ADEN  A  ''HUGE  CLINKERr  *  13 

Left  Ismalia  bj  rail,  arriving  at  Saez  in  three  hoars.  The 
outer  harbour  of  Port  Said  is  well  forward,  and  the  passage 
from  outside  to  the  inner  harbour  seems  to  be  kept  clear  of  sand 
to  the  depth  of  20  feet  without  much  dredging.  There  are 
forty  dredging-machines  on  the  canal,  but  one-half  of  them 
seems  to  be  undergoing  repair,  and  consequently  idle. 

17^ — Took  passage  in  the  Magdcda^  belonging  to  the 
Bombay  and  Bengal  Steam  Navigation  Company,  for  Bom- 
bay ;  charge  £45,  which  is  £15  less  than  by  the  P.  and  0. 
Company. 

The  MagdaJa  is  a  new  iron  boat  of  2100  tons,  180  horse- 
power engines,  bmlt  at  Hull  by  Earle  &  Co.,  a  screw  with 
four  blades,  and  so  easy  does  it  work  that  the  vibration 
caused  is  scarcely  perceptible  in  the  first  officer's  cabin,  where 
I  am  located;  and  even  in  the  saloon,  directly  over  the 
screw,  the  vibration  is  so  trifling  as  not  to  be  in  the  slightest 
degree  disagreeable. 
4  P.M. — Got  under  weigh.  Temperature  70°. 
18^^ — Since  starting  to  noon  to-day  ran  170  miles. 
Temperature  72^ 

19^^ — Made  224  miles.  Seems  to  be  a  trifling  current 
running  to  westward.    Temperature  76^ 

20M,  Sunday. — Made  236  miles.  An  American  missionary, 
Mr  Wyn  Coope,  destined  for  Allahabad,  read  the  service  this 
morning,  and  preached  a  very  good  sermon.  Temperature 
86^ 

2lsL — Made  246  miles.    Temperature  84^ 
22d. — Passed  several  islands,  none  of  them  inhabited, 
having  little  or  no  verdure.    Temperature  84^ 

23rf,  noon. — Cast  anchor  in  the  port  of  Aden.  Aden, 
which  our  chief  engineer  calls  a  "  huge  clinker,"  is  joined 
to  the  mainland  by  a  neck  of  sand ;  the  said  mainland  is  also 
to  a  great  extent  low  and  sandy.  It  is  said  there  is  a  little 
garden  somewhere  or  other  on  this  great  clinker — I  have  not 
Been  it.  The  only  fresh  water  here  is  got  by  distilling  from 
sea-water.  On  the  other  side  of  the  gulf  fresh  water  is  col- 
lected, and  brought  from  a  distance  of  25  miles  in  iron  pipes, 
and  then  conveyed  across  to  Aden ;  but  they  depend  prin- 
cipally for  water  on  distillation.  The  population  is  about 
30,000,    of    course    mainly    Arabs.      Our   troops  —  Hoyal 


14  ME  STANLEY— DR  LIVINGSTONE. 

Artillery,  native  artillery,  sappers,  ten  companies  of  a 
European  infantry  regiment  (the  82d),  and  a  regiment  and 
a  half  of  Indian  troops,  in  all  about  2000  men.  Sir  Edward 
Bussell  is  the  present  governor.  Half-a-dozen  merchant 
vessels,  a  French  and  an  English  gunboat,  and  a  small  craft 
belonging  to  the  Bombay  Marine  are  all  the  vessels  in  port 

Having  taken  in  some  elephants*  tusks,  and  packages  of 
gum,  in  the  evening  continued  our  voyage  for  Bombay ;  a 
light  NE.  monsoon  blowing,  with  smooth  water. 

Most  of  our  passengers  went  on  shore  at  Aden.  I  with 
Mr  Wyn  Coope  paid  a  visit  to  a  correspondent  of  the  Nero 
York  JEkraldy  Mr  Stanley,  who  has  come  to  Aden  for  the 
purpose  of  meeting  Dr  Livingstone,  daily  expected  from 
Zanzibar  either  by  the  way  of  Mauritius  or  Bombay,  in  hopes 
of  being  the  first  to  publish  in  the  New  York  papers  some 
account  of  Livingstone's  researches  (which  Mr  Stanley  doubt- 
less calculates  on  obtaining  from  him  on  the  passage  between 
Aden  and  Suez),  to  be  transmitted  from  Suez  to  New  York 
by  telegraph. 

Mr  Stanley  was  the  HeralcTs  correspondent  in  Abyssinia, 
and  is  about  as  rough  a  looking  tyke*  as  one  can  well  con- 
ceive. He  drew  a  caricature  of  a  young  cornet  who  received 
and  questioned  him  as  to  his  business  on  his  landing  on  the 
beach  at  Zoulah ;  and  in  the  same  spirit  he  drew  for  our 
amusement  the  characters  of  many  other  officers. 

His  history  of  the  expedition,  which  is  shortly  to  appear,  will, 
I  expect,  from  what  he  told  us,  contain  similar  caricatures  to 
those  he  drew  for  us.t   I  had.  formerly  met  Mr  Stanley  at  the 

*  But  this  ''rough-looking  tyke''  subeequently  performed  a  most  successful 

journey  from  the  coast  to  the  interior  of  Africa  ;  and  after  difficulties  such  as  are 

only  to  be  met  with  in  savage  Africa,  he  "  discovered"  Livingstone  at  UjijL    He 

succoured  him,  made  researches  with  him,  took  charge  of  hjs  papers.     Leaving 

Livingstone  to  continue  his  work,  Stanley  gave  the  world  news  of  the  great 

traveUer  in  his  book  **  How  I  Found  Livingstone,**  and  it  was  the  hope  that  in  a 

short  time  Livinntone  himself  would  leave  the  land  of  his  great  explorations  for 

home  ;  alas  I  in  January  1874  we  goisad  information,  namely,  of  his  death,  which 

took  place  in  May  1873,  beyond  Lake  Bemba,  in  the  Blsa  country.     His  faithful 

follower  Jacob  Wainwright  buried  his  heart  under  a  tree  near  the  village  of 

Kitumbo,  bringing  the  body  to  England.     On  April  18th,  187i,  took  place  the 

pnblic  funeral  in  Westminster  Abbey.     On  the  brazen  plate  of  the  coffin  are 

these  words : — 

David  LmHOsrovs. 

BoRX  at  Blantyre,  Lanarkshire,  Scotland,  IMA  AfarcA  1818. 

Died  at  11^  Central  Africa,  ith  May  1873. 

f  See  "  Coomassie    and    Magdala :   Two  British  Campaigns."    By  Henry  M. 
Stanley,  May  1874.    The  story  of  the  two  marches  is  graphieally  told. 


CHRISTMAS  DA  Y— BOMB  A  Y.  15 

hotel  at  Suez  before  he  left  for  Anneslej  Bay,  and  after  his 
return  from  Abyssinia  at  the  P.  and  0.  Hotel  at  Alexandria. 
At  the  table  at  Suez  he  looked  so  ungainly  that  none  of  the 
many  officers  who  were  there  congregated  ever  addressed  a 
word  to  him  whilst  I  was  there.  He  is  talkative  and  talented, 
but  his  appearance  is  very  rough.  We  spent  so  much  time 
with  Mr  Stanley  that  we  did  not  visit  the  cantonments. 

24^A,  noon. — 129  miles  from  Aden.  Distance  from  Suez 
to  Aden,  1305  miles ;  Aden  to  Bombay,  1634  miles. 

25f A,  Ckristmas  Day. — Christmas  Eve  was  in  a  way  kept 
upon  the  poop ;  some  singing  was  the  extent  of  it.  The  land 
of  Arabia  Felix  in  sight  since  leaving  Aden,  distant  some 
1 5  miles.     Since  noon  yesterday  ran  223  miles. 

26/A. — Ran  217  miles.  A  fresh  breeze  from  NE.,we  may 
call  it  the  regular  monsoon. 

27tAy  Sunday. — Ban  223  miles.  Temperature  78^ ;  aneroid 
steady.  We  appear  to  have  had  a  current  for  the  last  three  days 
of  from  one-half  to  three-fourths  of  a  knot  the  hour  against 
us. 

28tA. — Ban  228  miles.  Now  crossing  the  mouth  of  the 
Persian  Gul£  In  cabin  temperature  80^  The  deck  is 
covered  with  passengers,  two  Hindoos  (a  man  and  his  wife), 
eleven  Mussulmen,  and  three  Europeans  (a  woman  and  two 
men)  keep  possession  of  it  from  morning  to  night  They 
eat,  drink,  and  sleep  there,  and  the  Mussulmen  are  earnest 
in  saying  their  prayers  at  least  three  times  a  day.  The 
Christians  and  Hindoos  do  not  seem  to  do  anything  in  that 
way.  On  the  afber-hatchway  there  are  five  Hindoos  of  a 
higher  caste,  but  I  never  see  them  occupied  in  their  devo- 
tions; they  too  are  deck  passengers,  though  they  are  the 
owners  of  a  considerable  amount  of  specie  and  a  good  many 
packages  of  ivory,  gum,  &c.,  shipped  at  Aden. 

29tA. — Ban  223  miles. 

SOtA. — Ban  208  miles.     An  occasional  flying-fish  seen. 

31^^. — Arrived  at  Bombay,  after  having  run  into  a  ship 
at  anchor,  and  done  to  it  and  ourselves  considerable  damage, 
say  £500.  The  stupid  pilot  deserves  to  be  hanged.  Went 
to  the  Byculla  Hotel. 


•  • 


•   « 


CHAPTER  IL 

CayeB  of  Elephanta—Neir-Tetr's  Day — Cotton-mill — A  ** hoping**  Sub,  has  hiurd 
timM— A  jolly  old  ensign — ^Rulway  to  Nagpore — Hon^dawl^  Bullock- 
cart — Dawk  bungalows — Allahabad — Small  And  large  eggi — Miaiion-houie 
Convent  of  nuna — ^A  young  bishop— Palace  of  Akbar— The  Lingam — Festi- 
val on  the  Ganges — Sins  remitted — The  "Well  of  Cawnporo" — Horrors 
committed  by  Nana  Sahib — Happy  life  of  innkeepers — Lucknow,  dty  of 
palaces,  mosques,  and  temples — The  ruined  Residency — Return  to  Cawn- 
pore — Delhi — ^The  Jumna  Musjed — Cashmere  gate— The  beautiful  Kootub 
Minar — Curious  pillar  of  iron  —  Jumpers  into  pool  at  Mehrowlie  — 
Hodson  shot  two  sons  of  the  Emperor  ot  Delhi — Agra — Mounds  at  Delhi 
and  Jericho^The  Taj — Holy  Benarea — Temple  to  Doorga  and  its  600 
monkejs — Burning  dead  on  the  river — Hindoo  theology — Society  at  the 
Yictona  Hotel — Calcutta— Labour  of  women — Hindooism — Christianity — 
"  Cool  weather  " — Birds — Rain — The  Orissa  famine — Hotels  not  satisfactory 
— No  love 'lost  between  Europeans  and  natives — The  *' stinking  banar" — 
Bayard  Taylor  on  India. 

1^^  January  1869. — Drove  to  the  Band  and  hired  a  boat  in 
company  with  three  American  missionaries,  for  a  trip  to  the 
Oaves  of  Elephanta,  the  ime  grand  thing  to  be  seen  in 
Bombay.  The  distance  fix)m  where  we  embarked  is  about 
five  miles.  Close  to  where  we  landed  commences  a  gradually 
ascending  paved  way  of  a  couple  of  hundred  yards,  at  the  end 
of  which  the  entrance  of  the. cave  is  reached.  It  is  cut  out 
of  the  solid  hard  trap-rock,  its  height  about  16  or  17  feet. 
The  principal  cave,  off  which  are  several  smaller  caves  or 
chambers,  may  be  from  its  entrance  to  the  principal  group 
of  figures  at  the  opposite  extremity  some  20  yards  deep, 
and  the  width  is  at  a  sort  of  transept  which  stretches  across 
to  the  left  in  a  line  with  the  principal  group  of  figures, 
some  20  to  30  feet  more.  The  cave  appears  to  be 
supported  by  some  thirty  columns  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock, 
with  carved  colossal  figures  on  all  four  sides.  Many  columns 
have  been  broken  away,  and  indeed  if  they  were  all  gone  the 
roof  would  still  remain ;  the  columns  only  appear  to  support 
it,  but  do  not  do  so  in  reality.  The  principal  group  of 
figures,  in  height  some  18  feet,  is  the  Triad  of  the  Hindoos. 
The  other  figures  are  subordinate  gods  and  goddesses. 


^THE  ''HOPING  SVBr  17 

It  is  said  tkis  sect  of  Hindoos  did  not  exist  before  the 
fifth  or  sixth  centnrj  of  our  era,  so  that  it  is  not  likely  this 
cave  can  boast  of  greater  antiqaitj  than  a  thousand  or  twelve 
hundred  years. 

When  we  reached  the  cave  we  found  tables  spread  for  a 
picnic  for  some  150  or  more  of  the  P.  and  0/s  employes 
and  their  friends,  New- Year's  Day  being  a  holiday  in 
Bombay.  We  had  our  picnic  at  the  mouth  of  a  smaller 
cave,  which  was  tenanted  by  thousands  of  large  bats. 
The  Bombay  Botanical  Garden  is  a  young  but  promising 
establishment 

3rf,  Sunday. — Heard  a  very  uninteresting  preacher  hold- 
ihg  forth  to  a  scant  congregation  in  Christ  Church.       On 
approaching  the  church  a  stranger's  attention  is  attracted  by 
a  dozen  men,  six  at  each  Bide  of  the  building,  pulling  ropes 
which  keep  in  constant  motion  an  equal  number  of  punkas 
fixed  inside  the  church.     Labour  abounds  in  India ;    there 
are  everywhere  employed  two  men,  if  not  more,  to  do  the 
work  of  one.     In  the  United  States,  on  the  contrary,  you 
constantly  find  contrivances  in  operation  by  means  of  which 
one  man  is  enabled  to  do  the  work  of  two,  often  more.    The 
mail  is  in,  and  our  tiffin-table  is  filled  by  her  passengers. 
Talked  to  a  young  officer  who  had  just  arrived ;  he  com- 
plained very  much  of  his  ship,  three  in  a  cabin,  and  down  in 
the  lower  hold — ^pandemonium  he  called  it ;  half  starved  too ; 
did  their  best  to  keep  ahead  of  us,  but  afraid  to  push  her. 
This  young  fellow  had  just  been  at  home  for  a  year,  and  he 
hoped  to  get  home  again  in  two  years  more ;  hoped  also  to 
get  on  the  staflF,  for  which,  if  rings  on  his  fingers  would  do 
it,  he  ought  to  be  well  qualified.     All  the  young  officers, 
and  some  of  the  older  ones  too,  with  whom  I  have  come  in 
contact  on  this  trip,  hope  to  get  back  to  England  in  a  year 
or  two,  and  hope  to  get  upon  the  staff.     Really,  how  they 
can  get  home,  and  hon>  they  can  get  upon  the  staff,  would 
Beem  to  be  principally  what  they  think  about. 

Ath. — Since  I  have  been  here,  I  have  seen  the  thermo- 
meter in  my  room  as  low  as  73** — it  has  been  oftener  at 
80*,  and  even  as  high  as  84** ;  and  they  say  this  is  generally 
the  coolest  week  of  the  year  in  Bombay. 

Paid  a  visit  to  one  of  the  oldest  cotton-spinning  mills,  and 

B 


1 8  COTTON-MILLS— INDIAN  OFFICERS, 

a  very  creditable  establisliiiient  it  seems  to  be.  The  manager 
told  me  he  had  great  trouble  with  the  natives ;  they  seem, 
from  what  he  said,  to  have  no  head  for  such  work,  no  memory, 
and  were  consequently  always  going  wrong :  accidents  to 
them  from  the  machinery  were  very  common. 

At  dinner  I  sat  beside  my  young  hoping  friend ;  he  told  me 
he  was  a  sub ;  quite  a  youngster,  but  to  hear  him  talk  you 
would  think  he  had  at  least  served  through  the  whole  of  the 
Peninsular  War,  and  that  he  was  one  of  the  few  left.  He 
became  confidential  with  me,  and  announced  that  he  was 
suffering  from  heart  complaint.  "  Oh,"  I  said, "  as  a  matter 
of  course  a  man  of  your  age  and  standing  in  the  army  must 
have  a  heart  disease."  He  declared  that  was  not  what  he 
meant,  but  that  h^  was  really  suffering  from  a  chronic  affec- 
tion of  the  heart.  He  consulted  me  about  his  dress,  drew  my 
attention  to  the  heavy  coat  he  wore  even  in  this  warm  wea- 
ther, and  pulled  up  his  sleeve  to  show  me  that  beside  the 
thick  coat  he  also  wore  a  very  thick  flannel  shirt  next  his 
skin,  and  stated  that  with  all  this  he  did  not  feel  at  all  too 
warm.  He  gave  me  an  account  of  the  mannet  in  which  he 
passed  his  time.  On  parade  first,  after  getting  up ;  then  on 
returning  to  his  bungalow,  a  cold  bath,  after  being  stripped 
by  his  servants ;  then  came  the  breakfast ;  and  the  rest  of  the 
day  was  spent  in  tiffin  and  billiards,  and  ditiner  and  billiards. 
Well,  I  thought,  this  youngster  has  got  a  very  hard  time  of 
it.  Opposite  to  us  sat  a  very  fat  man  and  his  wife ;  his 
fingers  were  covered  with  rings,  some  of  which  he  took  off 
and  gave  to  his  wife,  who  put  them  into  her  pocket,  before  he 
commenced  to  eat ;  they  were  doubtless  in  the  way  of  the  free 
use  of  his  fingers.  He  talked  much  and  loud  to  the  master 
and  to  the  waiters,  and  seemed  to  be  a  person  of  great  im- 
portance. Neither  did  his  wife  Uphold  him  amiss.  Well,  he 
talked  so  much  that  at  last  he  let  out,  very  unintentionally, 
that  he  was — what  thii^  you  ?  A  jolly  ensign !  A  wag  to 
whom  he  let  out  the  secret,  observed  that  at  least  he  had  set 
him  down  for  a  major.  He  was  so  fat  that  he  might  have 
played  Falstaff  without  stuffing. 

The  samples  I  have  met  with  do  not,  I  confess,  prepossess 
me  in  favour  of  young  Indian  officers :  there  are  in  the  hotel 
a  great  many  of  them,  who  seem  to  be  all  day  loafing  about, 


RAILWAY— NAGPORE,  19 

drinking  and  smoking,  and  playing  billiards ;  and  so  they  pass 
their  time,  and  think  they  are  very  hard  used  by  being  kept 
some  three  or  four  years  on  a  stretch  in  India.  Poor  Betsy 
Wheeler  1  I  could  not  but  think  of  you  when  I  saw  the  jolly 
ensign  pnll  ofif  his  rings,  after  having  displayed  them  to  those 
about  him.  Betsy  Wheeler,  in  times  gone  by,  was  accustomed 
to  strut  up  the  aisle  of  my  parish  church  and  take  her  seat  on 
one  of  the  front  cross-benches,  and  after  haying  made  dis- 
play of  a  large  brass  ring  she  wore  On  her  forefinger,  delib- 
erately took  it  ofif,  wrapped  it  in  a  dirty  little  handkerchief, 
and  deposited  it  in  her  pocket.  But  Betsy  Wheeler  was  an 
idiot ! 

5^^ — Took  the  train  at  the  BycuUa  station  of  the  G.  I.  P.  R. 
for  Nagpore,  first  class  50  rupees  7  annas^  distant  519  miles, 
a  journey  of  nearly  twenty-eight  hours. 

The  line  is  well  managed.  At  Bhosawul  or  thereabouts, 
after  mounting  an  incline  of  1  in  37,  we  got  upon  table-land 
and  travelled  upon  a  plain  of  a  couple  of  hundred  miles,  a 
good  deal  of  which  lining  both  sides  of  the  rail,  was  princi- 
pally under  crops  of  cotton,  hemp,  and  castor-oil  plants*  There 
are  forty-six  stations  between  Bombay  and  Nagpore*  The  ride 
over  the  plain  is  uninteresting  and  very  thinly  populated. 
Average  height  above  the  sea  some  3000  feet ;  the  weather 
very  hot,  and  on  the  plain  very  dusty.  Trap-rock  all  the  way, 
and  there. is  some  tunnelling  through  it  just  before  mounting 
the  table-land,  but  none  elsewhere. 

The  first-class  compartment  in  which  I  was  is  about  10  to 
12  feet,  with  cushioned  seats  on  three  sides,  accommodating 
three  passengers.  One  of  the  seats,  the  back,  lifts  up  and 
forms  a  bed.  The  second  class  has  no  cushions,  the  hard 
boards,  and  no  glass  windows ;  so  uncomfortable  are  they  that 
DO  one  who  can  afiford  to  travel  first  class  goes  second, 
though  the  fare  is  less  by  one-half.  The  line  is  double  for 
about  one-half  the  way. 

1th. — Nagpore.  At  Residency  Hotel.  Temperature  75°. 
Engaged  horse-dawk  of  the  Deccan  Company  for  Jubbulpoor, 
160  miles,  for  146  rupees.  Captain  and  Mrs  M.  went  ofif 
each  in  a  bullock-cart,  and  a  bullock-cart  for  luggage,  at  the 
rate  of  1^  miles  the  hour.  We  are  within  the  cantonments ; 
the  native  town,  which  is  said  to  be  large,  is  4  miles  dis- 


20        ALLAHABAD— LARGE  AND  SMALL  EGGS. 

tant     The  troops  here  are  a  wing  of  a  native  regiment  and 
one  company  of  Europeans.    There  is  a  parcel  post. 

Mr  Wyn  Coope  arrived,  when  we  left  for  Jubbnlpoor 
in  a  carriage  drawn  by  two  horses — a  box,  in  fact,  oblong, 
7  feet  by  4,  and  5  high ;  the  bottom  covered  with  three 
cushions,  destined  to  form  our  bed  on  the  journey.  At 
first  we  found  the  dawk  very  rough,  and  by  the  time  we 
reached  Jubbnlpoor,  after  a  thirtynsix  hours*  ride  of  161 
miles,  we  had  become  so  accustomed  to  it  that  we  thought  it 
was  just  what  it  ought  to  be.  We  crossed  one  considerable 
river,  so  far  as  width  is  concerned,  but  not  of  depth  even  to 
prevent  our  passing  across  comfortably  in  the  carriage. 

On  the  road  are  some  ten  dawk  bungalows  at  which  eggs 
and  milk  are  procurable,  and  you  may  get  a  shakedown. 
On  the  whole,  the  country  is  flat  and  uncultivated ;  there 
are,  however,  some  points  of  pretty  scenery,  and  also  some 
cultivatioD.  Cool  at  night,  8  a.m.  temperature  57"*,  and  not 
unpleasantly  hot  during  the  day. 

9th. — Started  by  train  for  Allahabad  at  3.15  p.m.,  arriving, 
10th,  Sunday,  12.15  A.M.  Nine  hours,  a  distance  of  228 
miles.  The  line  is  through  a  valley,  hills  not  very  high  on 
either  side;  just  before  entering  Allahabad,  crossed  the 
Jumna.  Went  to  a  church,  but  found  it  empty,  the  clergy- 
man taking  a  holiday. 

In  Egypt  is  attributed  the  smallness  of  hen's  eggs  to  the 
artificial  mode  of  hatching  chickens  in  that  country;  here 
the  chickens  are  hatched  in  the  usual  way  by  putting  the 
eggs  under  a  hen,  nevertheless  the  eggs  everywhere  that  I 
have  seen  yet  are  quite  as  small,  if  not  smaller  than  those  of 
Egypt.  How  is  this  ?  From  Egypt  you  have  only  to  move 
into  Syria  (next  door),  where  the  artificial  mode  of  incu- 
bation is  not  followed,  and  there  the  eggs  are  of  a  fair  size. 
2  P.M.,  temperature  62**;  it  feels  quite  cool. 

Wth. — I  was  up  and  out  in  one  of  the  hotel  carriages,  on 
my  way,  as  I  thought,  to  join  a  missionary  party  at  the 
house  of  the  Rev.  Mr  Walsh,  about  to  visit  the  religious 
■festival  now  going  on  at  the  confluence  of  the  Ganges  and 
Jumna.  The  driver  of  the  carriage  had  been  properly 
instructed,  as  I  thought,  as  to  where  he  was  to  drive  me ; 
however,  he  went  off  in  the  contrary  direction,  and  after  an 


NUNNER  Y—THE  BISHOP.  %  i 

hour  stopped  in  front  of  a  group  of  buildings,  which  he  pro- 
nounced to  be  the  mission.  On  alighting  I  was  making  my 
way  towards  a  door  when  I  encountered  a  very  good-lookiug 
nun,  an  odd  occupant,  I  thought,  for  the  house  of  an  American 
missionary.  She  soon  solved  the  riddle ;  the  native  driver 
had  taken  me  to  the  Catholic  convent,  so  said  the  smiling 
young  nun,  who  spoke  very  good  English,  though  evidently 
a  foreigner,  and  offered  to  find  the  bishop,  who  would  direct 
me  to  the  whereabouts  of  Mr  Walsh.  This  gentleman  soon 
made  his  appearance,  and  as  I  had  prepared  myself  to  meet 
with  a  venerable  old  man  with  a  long  white  beard,  leaning 
perhaps,  as  he  advanced,  upon  a  staff,  I  was  not  a  little  sur- 
prised at  being  accosted  by  a  stout  broad-shouldered  young 
fellow,  certainly  under  thirty  years  of  age,  and,  as  it  struck 
me,  a  very  unfit  person,  in  one  sense,  to  have  charge  of  a 
nunnery.  The  bishop  was  very  courteous,  as  all  bishops 
are ;  and  when  I  explained  where  I  wanted  to  go,  he  gave 
directions  to  my  driver,  which  he  believed  and  hoped  would 
enable  him  to  proceed  all  right  Vain  hope  I  After  a 
further  drive  of  one  hour  and  a  half,  the  fellow  pulled  up 
at  a  bungalow,  not  Mr  Walsh's,  where  we  found  only  one 
person,  a  native  who  could  not  speak  a  word  of  English. 
As  it  was  now  past  nine  o'clock  there  was  nothing  for  it 
but  to  return  to  the  hotel. 

After  breakfast  my  missionary  friends  drove  up  to  the 
hoteL  They  had  come  from  the  religious  festival  on  the 
banks  of  the  Ganges.  I  arranged  at  once  to  go  with  them 
to  Mr  Walsh's  bungalow,  and  thence  to  the  fort,  one  of  the 
few  sights  of  Allahabad.  Arrived  at  the  bungalow,  I  was 
introduced  to  Mrs  W.  and  her  two  daughters,  three  fine 
young  ladies. 

The  fort  contains  the  palace  of  Akbar.  We  first  visited 
the  model-room  and  armoury,  where  everything  seemed  in 
good  order.  The  palace  now  turned  into  a  depot  for  stores 
for  the  troops.  Passed  through  a  building  containing  a 
siege  train,  and  then  to  a  subterranean  holy  place  con- 
taining many  Hindoo  idols,  and  to  which  on  the  present 
festive  occasion  thousands  of  Hindoos  were  flocking  to  pay 
their  devotions.  This  place  is  about  seven  feet  in  height, 
and  either  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock  or  perhaps  built  of  that 


22}  THE  GANGES— HINDOOS. 

material ;  the  light  was  bo  defective  that  it  was  difficult  to 
determine  which.     One  of  the  prominent  objects  of  adoration 
we  saw  was  the  celebrated  Lingam.     The  other  idols  were 
all  roughly-cut  stone  images  of  gods.     From  hence  we  pro- 
ceeded to  the  religious  festival  going  on  in  the  dry  part  of  the 
river  Ganges,  close  to  the  flowing  stream.     Here  many  thou- 
sands of  Hindoos  were  collected,  and  traders  in  their  booths 
lined  a  wide  space  leading  to  the  river.     Of  monstrosities 
there  was  also  a  sprinkling ;  one  calf  with  six  legs  was  a 
hermaphrodite ;  this  calf  formed  an  object  of  special  wor- 
ship.   There  was  a  cow  also  with  five  legs.     Fakirs  were  not 
wanting,  and  a  missionary  tent  was  there,  in  which  native 
Christians  were  holding  forth  to  their  devoted  brethren.     But 
the  great  end  and  object  of  the  gathering  was  to  get  rid  of 
their  sins  by  bathing  in  the  sacred  river  Gkinges.     A  few 
yards  from  the  shore  several  altars  (a  dozen  perhaps),  having 
the  appearance  of  small  straw  huts,  were  erected  in  the 
water,  each  with  an  idol  upon  it.     Batches  of  pilgrims,  con- 
sisting of  from  ten  to  twenty,  men  and  women  indiscrimi- 
nately, were  conducted  by  Brahmins  to  the  front  of  these 
altars,  where    after    depositing  their   money-offering   they 
bathed^  performing  in  the  wat€r  some  of  their  superstitious 
rites,  and  thus  getting  rid  of  all  sin. 

There  were  many  wretched-looking  old  men  and  women 
among  them,  who  were  barely  equal  to  the  effort  necessary 
to  take  them  into  the  water  and  bring  them  out  again  safely. 
The  whole  scene,  the  bathing  part  of  it,  was  more  or  less 
similar  to  that  which  might  be  witnessed  any  Easter  on  the 
banks  of  the  Jordan.  There  the  Christian  pilgrim  bathes, 
and  fills  his  tin  bottle  with  water  from  the  Jordan,  to  be 
taken  to  his  distant  home ;  here  the  Hindoo  also  bathes,  and 
<5arries  off  some  of  the  water  of  his  sacred  river  in  his  copper 
vessel.  The  thermometer  for  the  last  three  days,  in  a  room, 
varied  from  58**  to  62°. 

Vlth — Left  for  Cawnpore  by  train,  arriving  at  6  p.m. 
The  line  in  its  whole  extent  runs  through  the  valley  of  the 
Gunges,  a  perfect  flat,  no  hills  to  be  seen  on  either  side,  and 
for  the  most  part  well  cultivated.  In  many  places  through 
which  we  passed  there  was  evidently  a  great  want  of  rain, 
from  which  the  crops  were  suffering.     9  a.m.,  temperature 


NANA  SAHIB^WELL  OF  CAWNPORE.  23 

•2*.  Put  up  at  Inglis'  Hotel,  two  miles  from  the  station. 
Visited  the  pontoon  bridge  across  the  Ganges.  It  must  be 
half  a  mile  long,  and  formed  bj  two  lines  of  iron  girders 
placed  on  iron  pontoons,  which  are  some  25  feet  apart, 
6  to  8  feet  in  diameter,  and  40  feet  long,  the  width  of 
the  bridge  more  or  less. 

Took  a  buggy  for  the  famous  (or  infamous)  Well  of  Cawn- 
pore,  the  site  of  Wheeler's  intrenchment,  and  the  Ghat 
leading  to  the  place  of  embarkation  where  so  mauy  men, 
women,  and  children  about  to  embark  were  shot  down  by 
the  orders  of  Nana  Sahib.  The  ground  about  the  well  has 
been  raised,  and  now  forms  a  circular  mound  of  considerable 
extent,  and  about  20  feet  high  at  the  top,  is  now  enclosed 
by  ornamental  octagonal  walks  60  yards  in  circumference, 
in  a  depression  of  which  in  the  centre  is  the  famous  well, 
now  covered  up  by  a  handsome  pedestal  some  6  feet  high ; 
upon  this  stands  a  colossal  marble  figure  representing  a 
guardian  angel  clasping  two  palms,  by  Baron  Marrochetti. 
Six  steps  led  down  to  the  base  of  the  pillar,  from  which  to 
the  top  of  the  colossal  figure  is  about  18  feet.  The  figure  itself 
may  be  6  feet  in  height.  This  mound,  250  yards  in  circum- 
ference at  the  base,  is  at  the  opposite  extremity  to  where 
70a  enter,  of  a  handsomely  laid-out  walk  and  well-kept 
garden  of  26  acres  of  ground  enclosed  by  a  fine  iron  railing, 
and  entered  through  a  very  imposing  double  iron  gateway 
some  7  feet  in  height.  An  inscription  on  the  upper  part 
of  the  circular  pedestal  is  to  the  following  effect :  — 

**  Sacred  to  the  perpetual  memory  of  a  great  company  of 
Christian  people,  chiefly  women  and  children,  who  near  this 
spot  were  cruelly  massacred  by  the  followers  of  the  rebel 
Nana  Dhoondoo  Punt  of  Bithoor,  and  cast,  the  dying  and 
the  dead,  into  the  well  below,  on  the  15th  July  1857." 

The  garden  is  a  mile  in  circumference.  The  man  Murphy, 
I  was  informed,  who  was  one  of  the  three  persons  who 
escaped  the  massacre  at  the  place  of  embarkation  on  the 
Ganges,  looked  after  this  garden  for  some  months,  but  lost 
his  place  in  consequence  of  habitual  drunkenness,  which  I 
suppose  he  could  no  more  help  (the  habit  once  contracted) 
than  the  woman  who  unlocked  the  gate  for  me,  the  wife  of 
the  man  now  in  charge,  could  help  her  very  twisted  face. 


24  INNS  IN  CENTRAL  INDIA. 

A  church,  now  in  course  of  erection^  stands  in  the  centre 
of  the  gronnd  which  was  Wheeler's  intrenchment,  and 
a  cross  erected  at  some  distance  from  it  marks  the  spot 
where  many  of  the  victims  were  buried;  and  in  ft  smaU 
garden  close  by,  which  must  have  been  within  the  intrench- 
ment,  an  inscription  on  a  gravestone  tells  of  mauy  of  those 
who  died  within  the  intrenchment  lying  beneath  it. 

\4itk. — The  Inglis  Hotel  is  left  pretty  much  to  take 
care  of  itself.  Mr  Inglis  is  certainly  a  jolly  old  gentleman, 
and  very  courteous,  but  he  has  much  too  little  to  do.  It 
was  with  difficulty,  and  no  doubt  to  his  great  disgust,  that 
I  got  him  out  of  bed  yesterday  morning  by  10  A.M. ;  and 
when  I  wanted  my  bill  in  the  afternoon,  he  was  not  forth- 
coming, so,  as  none  of  the  native  servants  knew  anything 
of  English,  a  chance  visitor,  a  resident  who  happened  to 
drop  in,  was  asked  to  make  out  my  bill.  Happy  life  these 
innkeepers  lead  in  the  Central  Provinces  of  India !  How  they 
manage  to  live  at  all  by  their  inns  seems  a  mystery  to  me, 
for  they  have  always  a  host  of  servants  about  them,  and 
very  few  guests — ^three  or  four,  all  counted,  sitting  down  to 
meals  in  a  room  large  enough  to  dine  a  couple  of  hundred 
persons.  The  bedrooms  down  at  the  Inglis,  and  at  this 
hotel  at  Lucknow,  have  neither  locks  nor  bolts  to  them,  and 
still,  they  tell  me,  nothing  is  ever  lost. 

I  took  the  train  at  Cawnpore  at  8.30  p.m.,  reaching  the 
Lucknow  station  at  11  p.m.  Drove  to  Hill's  Hotel,  two  good 
miles  distant. 

After  a  two  hours'  drive  I  have  seen  the  greater  part  of 
this  place.  It  gives  one  the  impression  of  being  a  city  of 
palaces,  mosques,  and  Hindoo  temples.  I  went  through  the 
building  of  the  Martinifere  School,  where  200  boys  are  being 
educated,  but  the  present  is  vacation.  It  is  a  large  palace 
on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  from  the  mirador  of  which  one 
gets  very  extensive  views  over  the  city  and  neighbouring 
country.  In  a  vault  below  the  schoolroom  is  the  marble 
tomb  of  Major-General  Claude  Martin ;  an  inscription  on  it 
states  that  he  came  to  India  a  common  soldier,  born  at 
Lyons  6th  January  1735,  and  died  at  Lucknow  in  1800. 
He  is  the  founder  of  the  school.  Just  before  reaching  the 
school,  I  stopped  the  gharry  to  read  the  inscription  on  a  tomb 


LUCKNOW—THE  TYCANU.  25 

by  the  wayside,  which  with  a  large  tree  is  enclosed  within 
an  iron  railing :  ^^  Lieutenant  Adolphus  Otway  Mayne  of 
the  Bengal  Artillery,  killed  on  the  15th  Nov.  1857,  in  action 
at  the  relief  at  Lucknow,  aged  twenty-eight  years." 

Walked  to  the  rained  Residency,  in  which  by  a  handful 
of  troops  the  heroic  defence  was  made  against  the  rebels  in 
1857.  It  is  thoroughly  in  ruins ;  there  is  hardly  a  square 
foot  on  any  of  the  walls  without  a  bullet-mark,  and  generally 
the  marks  are  clustered  very  much  nearer  together.  The 
"  Tycanu  "  or  sunk  story,  the  quarters  of  the  women  and 
children  of  the  82d  Regiment,  and  the  walls  of  the  swim- 
ming bath,  or  perhaps  tank,  are  the  'only  places  I  saw  where 
shots  had  not  reached.  Close  to  the  main  entrance,  let  into 
the  wall,  is  a  small  slab  of  metal,  with  ^^  Aikin's  Post "  and 
"  Bailey's  Guard  "  written  upon  it.  The  ground  about  the 
Residency  is  turned  into  a  garden,  and  nicely  kept  up.  On 
a  mound  some  20  feet  high  is  a  monument  to  the  memory 
of  Sir  Henry  Lawrence,  and  the  brave  men  who  fell  in 
defence  of  the  Residency ;  in  the  cemetery  adjoining  are  an 
infinity  of  tombs,  with-  engravings  stating  in  memory  of 
whom,  and  by  whom  they  have  been  erected. 

Evening  of  the  15th,  took  a  gharry  to  the  railway  station 
for  Cawnpore.  The  Indian  innkeepers  in  the  Central 
Provinces  lead  an  easy  life  of  it  You  arrive  at  the  hotel 
and  leave  it  again  without  ever  having  met  with  any  one 
but  native  servants,  unless,  indeed,  as  was  the  case  at  Hill's 
Hotel,  that  Mr  Hill  sat  at  the  head  of  the  table  cThStej 
with  Mrs  Hill  on  his  right  He,  however,  paid  very  little 
attention  to  his  guests,  and  looked  as  if  he  considered  they 
were  under  an  obligation  to  him  for  ^^  bed  and  board,"  and 
80  it  is  in  those  parts ;  but,  as  I  have  said  elsewhere,  how 
these  men  manage  to  make  their  hotels  pay  is  a  mystery  to 
me,  seeing  that  in  this,  their  busiest  season,  neither  at 
Cawnpore  or  Lucknow  were  there  more  than  three  or  four 
persons  at  the  hotel. 

The  train  had  hardly  started  from  Lucknow  when  it  was 
discovered  that  the  axle  of  a  goods  waggon  was  broken,  so 
we  had  to  return,  which  caused  a  loss  of  half  an  hour,  and 
the  loss  also  of  the  train  from  Cawnpore  to  Delhi.  Had  to 
sleep  at  the  Cawnpore  station  and  wait  for   the  morning 


^6  DELHI— JUMNA  MUSJED. 

train,  which  arrived  at  8.30  a.m.,  three  hours  behind  time. 
In  the  train  were  Mr  Mnir,  the  lientenant-governor  of  the 
province,  Bishop  Milner,  and  also  a  yonng  man,  inspector 
of  police  at  Lucknow,  who  told  a  thousand  and  one  stories 
connected  with  his  occupation. 

18^A. — ^Arrived  at  Delhi  four  hours  behind  time.  Put  up 
at  the  Hamilton  Hotel,  where  we  found  an  old  soldier  in 
charge  of  the  native  servants,  an  Irishman,  as  he  said  him- 
selfj  though  he  had  been  born  at  sea.  He  scraped  acquaint- 
ance with  my  companion  Dr  Smith,  having  known  him  in 
the  Crimea.  This  old  soldier  contributed  to  make  things 
comfortable  for  us.  As  for  the  landlord,  we  never  saw  him. 
Walked  to  the  fort  or  palace,  saw  the  king's  baths,  the 
Pearl  Mosque,  and  the  Dewan  Khars,  or  hall  of  audience, 
now  undergoing  restoration.  Thence  proceeded  through  the 
Delhi  gate  to  the  Jumna  Musjed,  said  to  be  the  finest 
mosque  in  the  East  Visited  the  museum,  and  after  ti£G[n 
took  a  drive  to  the  fort,  and  then  to  the  ridge  upon  which 
the  force  that  advanced  against  Delhi  at  the  time  of  the 
mutiny  took  up  a  position  and  cannonaded  Delhi,  1200  yards 
from  the  walls,  gradually  drawing  nearer  until  they  had 
one  battery  160  yards  distant  only.  The  ruined  wall  and 
battered  state  of  the  Cashmere  gate,  which  was  blown  open 
by  Salkeld  and  Home,  shows  how  efiectual  our  siege  guns 
were.  Temperature  62"*  to  68°.  An  American  gentleman 
staying  at  the  hotel  thinks  the  evenings  cool  enough  for  a 
fire,  and  which  our  Irishman  takes  care  to  light  for  him  in 
the  dining-room*  It  looks  cheerful,  though  we  should  be 
just  as  comfortable  without  it. 

Yesterday  took  a  long  drive  with  Dr  S.  We  left  the 
Lucknow  gate,  proceeding  on  the  road  towards  the  Kootub 
Minar.  Stopped  half  way  (five  and  a  half  miles),  to  visit 
Suffcur  Jung's  tomb.  This  worthy  was  vizier  of  Ahmed  Shah, 
Emperor  of  Delhi,  who  reigned  from  1748  to  1754.  It 
is  in  a  thorough  good  state  of  preservation,  and  well  it 
might  be,  for  it  is  but  of  yesterday ;  it  stands  in  a  large 
handsomely  laid-out  garden  of  three  or  four  acres,  and  would 
make  a  fine  and  commodious  Indian  residence.  It  contains 
in  the  centre  of  the  first  floor  a  beautifully  carved  marble 
sarcophagus  highly  polished.     In  a  vault  is  a  grave  of  plain 


KOOTUB  MINAR—IRON  PILLAR.  27 

earthy  where  the  vizier's  dost  may  no  doubt  be  found.  The 
dome  of  this  noble  mausoleum  is  on  the  outside  cased  in 
marble.  After  spending  some  time  in  admiring  the  taste 
of  the  vizier's  son,  who  so  dutifully  erected  this  monument 
to  prevent  bis  father's  name  from  being  lost  to  posterity, 
drove  in  the  buggy  towards  the  KootubMinar,  being  satisfied 
with  an  outside  survey  of  the  dozens  of  tombs  that  cover 
this  line  of  road. 

As  we  neared  the  Kootub  we  were  greatly  struck  by  its 
appearance.  It  is  238  feet  high,  47  feet  diameter  at  the 
base,  with  an  upper  diameter  nearly  of  9  feet  It  is  divided 
into  five  galleries ;  in  the  lowest  story  the  flutes  are 
alternately  angular  and  circular,  in  the  second  circular,  and 
in  the  third  angular  only.  The  sections  above  this  are  faced 
with  marble,  having  a  belt  of  dark  stone  at  the  bottom,  and 
the  upper  section  of  all  is  of  red  sandstone,  of  which  the 
whole  of  the  outside  of  the  pillar  is  built,  having  two  belts 
of  marble,  and  some  ornamental  marble-work  close  to  the 
summit  It  is  really  a  beautiful  object  I  have  never  seen 
anything  like  it,  unless  occasionally  in  a  confectioner^ s  shop. 
The  Kootub  Minar  might  have  been  commenced  by  the 
Hindoos,  but  at  any  rate  it  was  completed  by  the  Mahometans 
in  1236  or  thereabouts.  379  steps  lead  to  the  summit,  from 
which  there  is  a  magnificent  view.  The  history  of  the 
pillar  is  involved  in  great  obscurity,  it  being  a  popular 
legend  that  the  Hindoo  Bajah  Pithora  commenced  a  pillar 
on  the  site  of  the  present  Minar  at  the  request  of  his 
daughter,  who  was  desirous  of  seeing  the  river  Jumna  daily, 
and  also  of  beholding  from  its  summit  the  rising  sun. 

Standing  near  to  the  Kootub  is  an  iron  pillar,  one  of  the 
most  curious  things  in  India.  It  is  a  solid  shaft  of  mixed 
metal  16  inches  in  diameter  and  about  50  feet  in  length, 
though  its  height  above  ground  is  only  22  feet,  some  30  feet 
being  buried  in  the  ground.  It  seems  to  have  been  erected 
in  1319 ;  a  legend  says  the  Bajah  Pithora,  dreading  the  fall 
of  his  dynasty,  consulted  the  Brahmins  as  to  what  step 
should  be  taken  to  ensure  its  continuance.  He  was  informed 
that  if  he  sunk  an  iron  shaft  into  the  ground  and  pierced  the 
head  of  the  snake-god  Lishay,  who  supported  the  world, 
his  kingdom  would  endure  for  ever.     The  pillar  was  accord- 


28  POOL  OF  MEHROWLIE— JUMPERS. 

ingly  constructed  and  the  directions  of  the  Brahmins  im- 
plicitly obeyed.  How  long  the  shaft  remained  undisturbed 
is  not  stated,  but  the  rajah,  either  distrusting  his  priestly 
advisers  or  desirous  of  seeing  for  himself  whether  the  snake 
had  been  touched,  contrary  to  the  entreaties  of  the  Brahmins, 
had  the  pillar  taken  up.  To  the  surprise  of  the  spectators 
and  the  consternation  of  the  sovereign,  the  end  of  it  was 
found  to  be  covered  with  blood,  and  the  rajah  was  informed 
that  his  dynasty  would  shortly  cease.  He  ordered  the  pillar 
to  be  again  inserted  in  the  ground,  but  the  serpent  below 
appears  to  have  had  enough  of  cold  iron,  and  the  Brahmins 
declared  that  the  sceptre  would  soon  pass  away  from  the 
hands  of  the  Hindoo  sovereign ;  anyhow,  the  charm  was 
broken,  for  Shahab-oodeen  shortly  afterwards  wrested  from 
l^ithora  his  life  and  kingdom,  and  from  that  day  to  this  no 
Hindoo  king  has  ever  ruled  in  DelhL 

After  eating  our  luncheon  in  a  very  comfortable  dawk 
bungalow,  we  proceeded  to  the  village  of  Mehrowlie,  where 
there  is  a  deep  pool  of  water,  the  height  from  the  parapet 
to  the  surface  of  the  water  being  some  40  feet,  the  water 
itself  being,  they  told  us,  30  feet  deep.  No  sooner  did 
we  appear  at  the  pool  than  eight  men  and  boys  prepared 
themselves  to  jump  from  the  parapet  (40  feet  high)  into 
the  water  beneath;  one  after  the  other  they  rapidly  jumped, 
their  legs  and  arms  spread  out  at  starting,  but  sharply  closed 
just  before  immersion.  They  did  not  sink  very  deep  in  the 
water,  for  almost  instantly  they  came  again  to  the  surface. 
It  indeed  seemed  a  wonderful  feat,  though  trained  to  its  per- 
formance from  childhood ;  it  was  easily  and  fearlessly  executed, 
and  without  any  danger.  Each  performer  received  sixpence 
for  the  exhibition. 

After  this  we  pushed  on  towards  Delhi,  visiting  on  the 
way  the  mausoleum  of  the  Emperor  Humayon,  where  the 
two  sons  of  the  Emperor  of  Delhi  took  refuge  after  the  fall 
of  Delhi,  and  were  there  captured  by  Hodson,  and  at  the 
fort  of  Furuna  Keela,  when  Hodson,  fearing  a  rescue,  shot 
them  with  his  own  hand. 

The  ruins  of  old  Delhi  are  spread  over  some  45  miles  of 
ground;  they  are  little  more  or  less  at  the  present  moment  than 
mausoleums  and  forts,  the  houses  in  which  dwelt  the  masses 


MOUNDS  ARE  OLD  BRICK-KILNS.  29 

having  almost  entirely  disappeared.  These  mansolenms,  of 
which  there  must  be  a  hundred  at  least,  are  large  buildings, 
the  centre  dome  being  hardly,  according  to  my  eye,  ever  less 
than  40  feet  in  height,  and  in  many  cases  very  much  higher. 
They  form  an  imposing  spectacle,  and  altogether  the  45  miles 
square  of  domes  do  not  look  much  unlike  a  giant  cemetery. 

As  we  neared  the  city  my  attention  was  drawn  by  Dr 
Smith  to  the  large  mounds  of  earth  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
present  and  of  the  past  Delhi ;  they  are,  he  said,  the  remains 
of  old  brick-kilns,  known  to  be  so.  The  mounds  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  supposed  site  of  old  Jericho  have 
exactly  the  same  appearance,  and  in  all  probability  are  also 
remains  of  old  brick-kilns.  The  result  has  been  produced  in 
this  way :  a  stack  of  bricks  mixed  with  fuel  was  prepared 
for  burning,  and  after  the  bricks  were  burnt,  the  sound  ones 
were  picked  out  and  carried  away,  the  broken  ones  and 
rubbish  left,  levelled  down,  and  a  fresh  stack  of  bricks  raised 
upon  it.  A  constant  repetition  of  this  operation  has  resulted 
in  these  huge  mounds  of  earth.  Sometimes  they  were  built 
upon,  which  accounts  for  the  ruins  of  buildings  being  mixed 
up  with  the  other  debris. 

21«^ — ^Agra.  Walked  to  the  Taj,  which  is  a  mausoleum 
standing  in  a  very  handsomely  laid-out  garden  of  some  ten 
acres.  The  building  stands  upon  a  platform  of  about  150 
yards  square,  and  is  itself  about  72  yards  square.  In  the  centre 
is  a  dome  of  100  feet  in  height,  the  interior  of  which  is 
about  25  yards  in  diameter,  and  of  an  octagonal  shape.  The 
height  inside  may  be  about  60  feet;  the  walls  some  15  feet 
thick.  An  elaborately  lattice-worked  marble  screen,  also 
octagonal,  12  yards  in  diameter  and  6^  feet  high,  standing 
in  the  centre  of  the  floor  of  the  dome,  encloses  two  marble 
sarcophagi  inlaid  with  flowers  in  red,  green,  and  black  stones, 
the  work  beautifully  executed.  The  floor  and  the  sides  of  the 
dome  are  wholly  of  marble,  the  first  inlaid,  the  second  with 
exquisitely  carved  flowers.  Below  them  are  eight  niches  cor- 
responding to  the  eight  sides  of  the  octagon,  and  eight  smaller 
ones  immediately  above  the  large  ones.  The  eye  meets  with 
nothing  in  this  room  but  white  marble  beautifully  carved  or 
exquisitely  inlaid  with  various-coloured  stones.  By  a  descent  of 
twenty-five  steps  you  reach  a  subterraneous  apartment  directly 


30  AGRA— THE  TAJ— BENARES. 

Tinderneatli  that  jnst  described,  in  which  there  are  two  marble 
tombs,  of  Noor  Jehan  and  Shah  Jehan,  with  long  inscriptions 
on  them.  Here  I  was  told  the  bodies  were  buried.  On  the 
outside  of  the  building,  at  each  corner  of  this  square  of  72 
yards,  stands  a  handsome  column  of  some  50  feet  in  height. 
The  whole  building  inside  and  out  is  cased  with  white  marble, 
as  are  also  the  four  columns  at  the  comers.  The  platform 
on  which  the  building  stands  is  raised  above  the  garden  some 
20  feet  The  facade  is  of  very  beautiful  marble  carved  and 
inlaid.  Besides  the  centre  room  under  the  dome,  the  build- 
ing contains  several  other  rooms.  The  broad  garden  walks 
are  paved  with  large  flat  stones  or  slabs.  This  monument  is 
placed  at  one  end  of  the  garden,  and  borders  on  the  Jumna. 

On  returning  from  the  Taj  I  walked  all  over  a  mound  of 
earth  similar  to  those  I  have  already  spoken  of  at  Delhi.  It 
varies  in  height  from  nothing  to  60  or  70  feet,  and  is  very 
irregular  both  in  shape  and  height ;  outside,  in  every  respect 
it  exactly  resembles  the  Jericho  mounds. 

22^1 — Left  Agra  for  Benares.  Put  up  at  the  Victoria  Hotel. 

23c/. — ^Visited  the  public  gardens ;  they  are  prettily  laid  out ; 
but  though  the  plants  are  copiously  irrigated,  they  look  as  if 
a  shower  or  two  of  rain  would  wonderfully  freshen  them  up. 
Took  Shiva  Dutta  Mier  as  my  guide,  and  started  off  in  a 
gharry  to  explore  somewhat  the  wonders  of  the  city.  This 
guide  speaks  English  singularly  well ;  he  had  been  educated 
by  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Sherring,  an  English  missionary. 

We  first  went  to  a  Mahometan  burial-ground,  where  the 
carving  in  and  around  some  of  the  tombs  I  should  have 
thought  very  well  executed,  had  I  not  just  come  from  a  visit 
to  the  tombs  of  old  Delhi  and  the  Taj  at  Agra,  than  which 
1  can  conceive  nothing  more  beautiful. 

We  next  visited  a  Hindoo  temple,  Doorga  Khand,  where 
the  great  object  of  the  worship  is  the  goddess  Doorga,  and 
where  500  monkeys  are  kept  all  loose  outside  the  temple ;  spent 
four  annas  in  gramme  to  give  them  a  feed,  and  a  comical 
scene  it  was  to  see  these  caricatures  of  men  fighting  among 
themselves  for  the  lion's  share. 

The  temple,  with  some  elaborate  carving  on  the  outside, 
was  a  dirty  little  place  inside,  but  it  was  strewed  with  offer- 
ings of  flowers,  a  string  of  which  one  of  the  priests  put  over 


NANA  SAHIB,  HIS  HOUSE  AND  TEMPLE.       31 

my  head  cost  me  four  annas  more.  After  this  we  proceeded 
to  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  and  there  in  a  small  boat  coasted 
along  about  half  a  mile  of  the  holiest  part  of  the  river.  Of 
the  scene  on  its  banks  I  am  incapable  of  giving  an  idea. 
I  may  say,  however,  that  the  background,  of  considerable 
height,  consists  principally  of  Hindoo  temples  and  houses 
belonging  to  different  rajahs  from  all  parts  of  India,  for  it 
is  a  popular  belief  among  the  Hindoos  that  to  own  a  house 
and  a  temple  in  the  holy  city  is  one  way  of  getting  to  heaven. 

Nana  Sahib  owned  a  house  and  temple  here ;  whether  his 
devotion  in  this  particular  will  aid  him  in  his  upward  flight 
may  be  doubted. 

In  the  foreground  are  many  ruined  buildings  which  have 
tumbled  down  to  the  water's  edge,  and  flights  of  stone  steps 
reaching  upwards  from  the  river  to  the  temples,  and  extend- 
ing all  along  the  most  holy  part  of  the  river.  Thousands  of 
Hindoos,  men  and  women,  old  and  young,  were  employed  in 
washing  clothes  and  bathing  in  the  river ;  and  in  one  spot 
on  the  shore  set  apart  for  the  purpose  were  three  small  piles 
of  burning  wood,  each  with  a  body  in  the  centre  being  re- 
duced to  ashes.  We  drew  our  boat  close  in  to  see  the  operation 
more  clearly,  which,  with  two  of  the  bodies,  came  to  a  close 
while  we  remained  there.  The  ashes  of  these  two  bodies, 
with  the  parts  (the  guide  said  it  was  the  breast-bone)  which 
resisted  a  four  hours'  fire,  were  cast  very  unceremoniously 
into  the  river.  The  third  body,  the  feet  of  which  protruded 
from  the  end  of  the  pile  towards  the  river,  we  left  burning 
brightly.  Of  course  this  burning  the  dead  at  Benares  must 
be  constantly  going  on,  since  the  city  contains  30,000  inhab- 
itants, of  whom  two- thirds  are  Hindoos,  who  invariably  burn 
their  dead.  As  practised  here  the  custom  seems  a  barbarous 
one,  shovelled  or  pitchforked  into  the  river  as  are  the  ashes 
and  unconsumed  bones.  The  old  Romans  performed  the 
operation  in  a  much  more  civilised  manner ;  they  burned  their 
dead  in  heated  ovens  or  furnaces,  collected  the  ashes  carefully 
and  deposited  them  in  urns,  which  may  be  seen  at  this  day, 
thousands  of  them,  arranged  in  their  columbaria — this  was 
civilisation,  the  Hindoo  method  is  a  barbarity. 

We  now  landed  and  walked  through  some  of  the  streets 
of  the  old  city ;  there  is  one  so  narrow  that  by  stretching 


32  HINDOOISM-^THE  COCKNEY. 

out  your  anns  you  may  touch  the  houses  on  either  side.  It 
is  three  miles  loug^  and  filled  with  temples  and  places  dedi- 
cated to  idol-worship,  and  with  crowds  of  tall,  lanky,  half-clad 
natives.  I  asked  the  guide,  a  very  astute  fellow,  if  he  wor- 
shipped those  idols ;  he  said  he  did.  "  But,"  I  rejoined, "  you 
believe  in  only  one  Gtod  ?  "  "  Yes,"  he  replied, "  quite  true; 
like  you,  we  believe  in  one  God ;  but  these  idols  represent  the 
beings,  the  judges  and  others,  who  compose  God's  court  I  Like 
you  too,"  he  said,  "  we  have  our  holy  Trinity — ^the  Creator, 
the  Preserver,  and  the  Destroyer."  "  Is  there  one  day  in  the 
week,"  said  I,  "  that  you  keep  holy  ?  "  "  Yes,"  he  said,  "  Sun- 
day, but  not  because  it  was  the  day  on  which  God  rested  after 
the  creation.  Our  belief  of  the  creation  is  this  :  God  slept 
in  the  sea  upon  a  snake  with  a  thousand  heads,  and  as  he 
slept  a  lotus  plant  grew  up  out  of  his  belly,  and  as  it  grew 
it  changed  into  Bramah,  who  created  the  world.  We  believe," 
he  added,  '^  that  the  world  is  supported  upon  the  heads  of  the 
snake."    The  Lingam  is  seen  everywhere  here. 

The  dinner  at  the  Victoria.  We  were  six.  At  the  head 
of  the  table  sat  a  man  who  had  been  born  in  Chancery  Lane ; 
he  had  been  in  India  since  1854.  Opposite  to  me  a  very  stout 
sergeant  of  artillery,  and  on  his  right  a  half-caste  lady,  the 
wife  of  the  man  who  first  saw  light  in  Chancery  Lane ;  and 
on  my  left  sat  a  white  woman,  no  doubt  the  sergeant-major's 
wife.  At  first  all  were  mum.  I  felt  that  I  was  a  wet 
blanket  for  them,  so  I  made  an  effort  to  set  them  all  at  their 
ease.  The  whole  five  were  evidently  one  party,  but  what  their 
particular  business  here  in  Benares  was  I  could  not  discover. 
The  Cockney  was  soon  at  his  ease,  and  then  the  man  in  his 
shirt-sleeves  began  to  whistle.  The  sergeant  put  in  his  spoke 
occasionally,  and  so  did  the  half-caste.  In  fact,  the  half- 
caste  impressed  me  with  the  idea  that  she  was  really  her 
husband's  better  half.  The  sergeant's  wife  hardly  opened 
her  mouth.  The  Londoner  criticised  the  dinner,  and  aimed 
at  being  witty ;  he  evidently,  I  thought,  had  married  the 
half-caste  for  money.  He  began  to  talk  loud  about  London, 
and  if  there  was  any  divergence  of  opinion,  which  there 
was  occasionally  on  the  part  of  the  man  in  the  shirt-sleeves, 
he  offered  at  once  to  make  a  bet.  I  got  up  the  moment 
the  repast  was  ended  and  went  to  my  room,  when  they  all 


BEEHEA  HOUSE— CALCUTTA.  33 

became  yery  jolly.    This  hotel  seems  as  if  it  had  no  head ; 
this  is  common  in  the  Central  Provinces. 

ath. — Left  Benares  by  train,  reaching  Beehea  same  day. 
Found  Mr  S.  and  his  daughter  at  the  station  starting  for 
their  home,  3  miles  down  the  line,  on  a  ^^  trolly ; "  ^they 
kindly  offered  to  drop  me  at  Beehea  House,  as  they  went 
along.  A  trolly  is  a  small  railway  truck  with  chairs  or 
seats  fitted  upon  it,  which  people  living  in  connection  with 
the  line  make  use  of  for  moving  about.  It  is  pushed  along 
by  two  coolies,  whilst  two  others  sit  on  the  tail  of  the  trolly 
in  reserve.  The  coolies  drive  along  the  trolly  at  the  rate 
of  about  7  miles  an  hour,  pushing  from  behind,  running 
along  themselves  on  the  rad,  and  will  easily  do  in  this  way 
50  or  60  miles  a  day.  A  bright  lookout,  of  course,  is  kept 
for  trains,  and  in  the  daytime  any  train  coming  can  always 
be  seen  so  as  to  give  time  to  remove  the  trolly  from  the  rails. 
It  is  in  three  pieces,  the  platform  lifting  off  first,  and  then 
the  four  wheels,  each  pair  attached  to  the  axle. 

Beehea  House  is  five  minutes'  walk  from  the  line;  it 
contains  very  comfortable  quarters  and  a  good  billiard-room. 
It  was  built  by  Mr  Burrows  just  after  the  mutiny,  hence 
its  castellated  character.  The  firm  is  Thomson,  Fox,  &  Co. ; 
they  hold  some  30,000  acres  of  land,  which  give  a  rental 
of  100,000  rupees  or  £10,000  a  year.  They  have  also  three 
indigo-factories,  and  have  made  some  200  miles  of  the  E.  L 
Bailway,  which  runs  near  their  house,  and  have  a  contract 
for  keeping  some  60  miles  of  it  in  repair.  At  this  moment 
they  are  employed  in  laying  down  another,  a  second,  line 
of  rail  over  the  Saone,  a  mile  in  length. 

Leaving  Beehea  House  at  9  jl.k.  on  the  26th,  reached 
Calcutta,  409  miles,  at  6  A.K.  on  the  next  day. 

The  railway  terminus  is  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river 
firom  the  city,  so  we  had  to  be  ferried  across.  I  located  my- 
self at  the  Great  Eastern,  or  Wilson's  Hotel. 

I  was  much  amused  with  many  things  I  saw  at  Beehea 
House.  The  old  linseed -mill  is  quite  a  curiosity;  girls 
employed  breaking  up  brickbats,  to  serve  instead  of  sand 
for  making  mortar.  There  were  two  big  girls  employed  in 
this  work,  earning  one  anna  (three  halfpence)  each  per  day. 
There  were  several  women  employed  in  grinding  paint,  earn- 

0 


54  BI2n>OOSOB£I£TF—Z>£UJXKENEUEOJREAKS. 

fng  a&e  asd  aluilf  aimae  per  dar,  and  in  '™>l=T'"g  pntfy.  A 
dij-labDurer  earned  fonr  aima£  a  dinr.  Tber  can  live,  that 
^  get  llkeir  £11  cf  lioe,  far  one  anna  a  dvr,  and  ht  fBitiirfifd 
Meat  (beef  and  mnttGn)  ccN^ta  thre^^enoe  per  Ih.  Sieep  were 
bcmgiit  for  about  &izr  fibillings,  and  fiKtentH]  xp  to  90  Um., 
young  oxen,  two  jean  old,  for  abont  seven  sbilliagi.  If 
Ton  malce  the  Hindoc^  and  ]£n»ZLhnen  CSuktiani,  tiiat  is, 
flefib-eating  people,  I  sn^^ect  there  wonld  soon  be  a  lue  in 
Ibe  price  of  bntcher^s  meat  Tber  ironld  donbtilen  beeome 
diinken  of  spnitnoos  liqnarB,  and  foUcwing  the  example  set 
tbem  hy  Christians — Enropeaas — no  donbt  dnmkeBiiess 
voold  obtun  among  ibem.  Qnerr,  Iben,  is  it  not  better  tbef 
sboold  remain  Hindoos,  and  so  oontinne  to  be  sober,  and 
satisfied  with  rioe,  irhidi  ooste  tbem  one  anna  a  dar,  instead 
of  going  in  for  meat,  wbidi  ironld  cost  them  foor  times  as 
mnch?  and  get  aecDstomed  to  strong  drink? 

Hindooism,  sobnetj,  and  rioe,  against  ChristianitTy  drunk- 
enness, and  flesh-meat.  TerQ  j  this  last  state  of  these  men 
wonld  be  irorse.  Dronken  Europeans  is  a  sight  oonstantlj 
before  the  Hindoos  and  Mnssnlmen. 

In  a  first-class  curiage,  coming  from  Benares,  was  an 
Englishman,  as  well  dressed  and  better  a  great  deal  than  I 
was,  who  got  so  drank  that  when  he  arrived  at  his  station 
four  men  were  reqpured  to  lift  ban  out  of  the  carriage. 
Dronken  soldiers  are  erexy  day  seen  on  the  line ;  of  course 
the  Hindoo  con&eq[nentlT  lools  npon  the  free  nse  of  spirits 
as  really  a  part  and  portion  of  Christianity,  since  the  ilUe 
of  the  Christians,  the  English,  who  are  moving  heaven  and 
earth  through  the  missionaries  to  torn  them  all  into  CSiris- 
tians,  are  those  who  are  most  given  to  the  useof  intoricating 
liqnors.  The  four  men  who  work  Mr  Thomson^s  trolly  re- 
ceive each  four  rupees  a  month,  eight  shillings ;  four  pounds 
sixteen  shillings  a  year.  When  required  they  can  drive  a 
trolly  fifty  or  sixty  miles  a  day ;  with  four  rupees  a  month 
they  procure  all  they  want  in  the  world — bed,  board,  and 
clothing.  Why  disturb  such  a  happy  state  of  things  ?  for 
it  is  quite  certain  if  you  make  ChriBtians  of  them  they  will 
no  longer  be  content  with  Hindoo  fare.  Our  agricultural 
labourer  with  twenty  rupees  a  month,  in  reality  is  not  half 
so  well  off  as  the  trollyman  with  his  four  rupees  a  month, 


LIFE  IN  CALCUTTA— BIRDS.  35 

simply  because  lie  has  wants  to  satisfy  which  the  Hindoo 
knows  nothing  of;  and  the  difference  in  the  wages  of  the  two 
men,  in  favoor  of  our  labourer,  is  nevertheless  not  an  eqoi- 
Talent  for  or  equ&l  to  the  excess  of  his  wants  over  those 
of  the  Hindoo. 

Weather  cloudy,  temperature  in  room  74®  to  SO""  during 
the  twenty-four  hours.  This  is  cool  Calcutta  weather! 
Called  on  the  C.'s  ;  one  of  them  had  gone  away  tiger-huntings 
the  other  just  going  to  the  Viceroy's  levee,  and  afterwards 
he  was  going  up  country  some  300  miles  to  a  ball  I 

29^^ — My  room,  which  is  up  three  flights  of  stairs  in  this 
big  hotel,  has  an  extensive  lookout  over  the  flat-roofed  city 
of  Calcutta,  and,  Asmodeus-like,  I  can  amuse  myself,  when  so 
disposed,  by  looking  into  many  of  the  apartments  which  are 
opened  out  before  me,  and  see  what  the  occupants  are  doing ; 
but  it  would  be  hardly  fair  to  tell  their  secrets  here. 

Birds. — ^Wherever  I  have  hitherto  been  in  India  the  fea- 
thered race  seem  quite  unmolested.  The  Minar  bird  is  every- 
where, on  &11  roads,  on  all  telegraph  wires ;  and  as  if  there 
was  not  room  enough  for  him  on  the  land,  you  see  him  sit- 
ting on  the  hawsers  and  cables  of  small  vessels  in  the  rivers, 
in  a  row,  from  the  water's  edge  up  to  the  hawse-hole.  There 
is  a  black  bird,  something  like  the  starling  in  its  habits,  seen 
everywhere  in  flocks  perching  on  the  backs  of  sheep.  The 
everlasting  crow  meets  you  at  every  turn.  This  morning, 
whilst  at  breakfast  with  fifty  other  people  in  the  room,  a  crow 
entered  and  walked  off  with  a  good  large  piece  of  meat  out 
of  one  of  the  dishes  placed  on  the  table.  Here  in  Calcutta 
the  adjutant  bird  is  everywhere.  Pigeons  and  doves  swarm 
over  the  roads  and  fields  in  the  country,  and  no  one  disturbs 
them.  Smaller  birds  like  our  sparrows  are  innumerable. 
Parrots  abound  in  some  localities ;  at  Agra  in  the  Taj  garden 
there  were  hundreds,  and  at  Benares  were  a  great  many  also. 
The  jay  is  very  common.  The  great  number  of  trees  which 
are  met  with  in  India  everywhere  that  I  have  been,  greatly 
favours  the  breeding  of  birds.  At  the  stations,  where  every 
bungalow  stands  in  its  own  compound  of  from  one  to  twenty 
acres,  large  trees,  as  the  peepul,  tamarind,  mango,  and  many 
others,  invariably  cover  the  ground  pretty  thickly,  so  that 
the  birds,  being  unmolested  by  man,  have  a  very  good  time 


36  AT.  CHURCH— LORD  MAYO. 

of  it,  and  haye  only  the  natural  enemies  of  their  own  species 
to  fight  against. 

On  the  night  of  the  27th  there  was  a  heayj  fall  of  rain, 
with  sharp  claps  of  thunder,  which  continued  for  some  hours ; 
the  only  rain  that  had  fallen  here  for  some  months. 

31^,  Sunday, — ^Went  to  church ;  the  gist  of  the  sermon  was 
meant  to  show  what  little  chance  we  ha^e  of  escaping  punish* 
ment,  when  the  Creator  thought  it  right  and  proper  and  just 
that  the  ^^  man  of  Crod  "  should  he  torn  to  pieces  hy  a  Hon, 
merely  because  one  more  astute  than  himself,  the  old  prophet 
of  Bethel,  succeeded  in  persuading  him,  contrary  to  Gk)d's 
commands,  \j^  go  back  to  his  house  and  there  eat  and  drink 
with  him.  The  preacher  said  that  whatever  were  the  com- 
mands of  Ch)d,  we  were  boxmd  to  obey  them,  we  were  not 
justified  in  looking  at  consequences:  quite  right,  I  agree 
with  him ;  but  the  difficulty  lies  in  distinguishing  between 
what  are  really  the  commands  of  Ghxi  and  what  are  not. 
How  are  we  to  get  at  this  ?  Are  we  to  trust  our  preachers, 
erring  mortals  like  ourselves,  to  point  out  what  is  what  in 
this  matter  ?  or  are  we  allowed  to  make  use  of  that  quality, 
BeasoTij  with  which  Crod  has  endowed  us  alone  of  all  His 
creatures,  and  thus  to  solve  the  difficulty  for  ourselves? 
This  seems  the  rational  way  of  doing  it 

Lord  Mayo  and  his  wife  were  at  church.  There  was  heavy 
rain  the  night  before  last,  which  the  papers  say  extended 
well  into  the  Central  Provinces,  and  though  it  has  come  late, 
will  help  to  avert  the  threatened  famine,  to  meet  which,  I 
believe,  the  Gh>vernment  has  been  for  some  weeks  taking  active 
measures  of  precaution.  The  Orissa  afiair,  during  the  admin- 
istration of  Sir  John  Lawrence,  which  involved  the  death  of 
half  a  million  of  people,  oujfht  to  serve  to  keep  the  Govern- 
ment up  to  the  mark  on  the  occasion  of  the  present 
threatened  scarcity. 

Hotels  in  India, — This,  perhaps,  the  Great  Eastern,  stands 
at  the  top  of  the  list  My  room  is  up  three  flights  of  steps. 
It  is  25  feet  by  22,  and  at  least  18  in  height ;  the  walls 
whitewashed,  the  surface  unbroken  all  over  except  by  one 
small  mirror.  The  floor  is  covered  by  very  old  and  patched 
matting,  which  has  never  been  swept  since  I  came  into  it  (a 
week  ago),  nor  to  all  appearance  for  many  months  before. 


HOTELS  IN  INDIA.  37 

A  rickety  iron  bedstead  with  the  thinnest  of  mattresses  upon 
it,  qnite  unequal  to  prevent  your  being  seriously  incommoded 
by  the  iron  sacking  underneath,  and  covered  with  a  tattered 
mosquito-curtain  quite  useless  for  keeping  that  troublesome 
little  animal  from  sucking  your  blood  at  night;  a  single 
chair  and  a  table  to  match;  a  washing-stand  and  towel- 
horse,  and  a  chest  of  drawers  without  keys.  The  door  opens 
on  a  long  passage  (with  similar  rooms  on  each  side  of  it), 
which  is  generally  crowded  by  servants  lying  about  the  floor : 
darkie  never  stands  when  he  can  avoid  it 

Every  man  who  comes  to  a  hotel  in  India  brings  a  ser- 
vant with  him,  or  hires  one  so  soon  as  he  reaches  the  hotel ; 
and  woe  be  unto  you  if  you  do  not  keep  your  bedroom  door 
locked ;  with  all  these  fellows  hanging  about  the  passage, 
your  small  matters  would  disappear  very  quickly.  At  7 
A.1C  your  servant  knocks  and  brings  you  a  cup  of  what  he 
calls  tea  and  some  buttered  toast :  do  not  suppose  that  this 
tea  and  toast  bear  any  resemblance  to  the  articles  called  by 
same  names  in  England ;  the  tea,  tasting  anything  but  like 
tea,  comes  mixed  with  sugar  and  milk ;  no  teaspoon  with, 
it,  and  if  you  ask  for  one  you  are  told  there  are  very  few 
in  the  house.  Heaven  only  knows  what  the  fellow  who 
made  the  tea  may  have  stirred  it  up  with,  the  flavour  would 
lead  you  to  believe  it  might  have  been  stirred  with  anything 
but  a  spoon.  The  toast  is  always  cold  spongy  stuff  soaked 
with  ghee.  At  9  A.K.  a  bell  warns  you  that  breakfast  is  on 
the  table.  You  descend  (or  at  least  I  did)  three  long  flights 
of  stairs,  and  after  traversing  a  long  hall  with  a  marble 
floor  you  enter  the  breakfast-room,  which  serves  for  tiffin 
and  dining  room  as  well.  Here  you  are  in  a  crowd,  fifty 
men  and  women  sitting  down  to  breakfast,  and  fifty  natives 
waiting  upon  them.  Every  man  has  his  own  servant ;  if  he 
had  not  he  would  not  get  much  to  eat,  though  there  may  be 
ten  or  a  dozen  hotel  servants  in  the  room  as  well.  These 
servants  are  all  clad  in  white  calico  from  their  throats  to 
their  ankles,  and  on  their  heads  they  wear  white  turbans  ; 
their  feet  are  bare,  so  they  make  but  little  or  no  noise  as 
they  patter  about  on  the  marble  floor ;  they  are  so  thin  that 
if  you  look  at  them  edgeways   you   can  hardly  see  them. 


38  THE  MAWAN-^HOUSES. 

The  thermometer  only  stands  at  80'',  so  the  punkas  are  not 
kept  going ;  you  see  them  hung  the  length  of  the  room  in 
a  double  row  just  clear  of  your  heads,  awaiting  to  be  made 
use  of  when  warm  weather  arrives. 

The  dinner— the  soup  and  meats  are  very  fair,  but  I  have 
tasted  no  good  fish  in  Calcutta ;  indeed  I  am  told  that  many 
people  eschew  fish  here  as  a  rule,  there  are  so  many  dead 
bodies  floating  about  the  river.  They  are  afraid  that  in  eat- 
ing fish  tbey  may  be  eating  part  of  a  native ;  as  a  rule, 
Europeans  have  no  love  for  the  natives,  so  they  would  not 
like  to  eat  of  them ;  however,  there  is  no  love  lost  on  either 
side. 

Now  this  hotel,  the  Great  Eastern,  is  called  the  best 
hotel  in  India,  and  so  it  may  be.  I  have  seen  none  better, 
nor  on  the  whcde  so  good ;  they  are  more  like  caravansaries 
the  whole  of  them — no  comforts  of  any  kind. 

"Nobody  walks  in  Calcutta,"  a  gentleman  replied,  to 
whom  I  had  remarked  that  the  streets  badly  wanted  paving ; 
and  so  the  palkee-bearers  seem  to  think  too,  for  they  bother 
you  to  ride  ss  much  as  the  cabmen  in  Naples. 

8rf  Fehnjtary. — Drove  in  a  buggy  about  Calcutta  and  the 
vicinity.  It  is  a  fine  city  certainly  ;  the  Maidan  is  studded 
with  what  in  England  would  be  called  country-houses,  the 
residences  of  the  merchants  and  others  of  the  upper  classes. 
The  grounds  about  many  of  these  houses  are  well  kept,  the 
grass  green  (now  after  the  rain  we  have  had),  and  great 
pains  seem  to  be  taken  generally  to  keep  it  in  order.  No 
lawn  in  England  has  a  nicer  appearance  than  have  many  of 
these  plots  of  grass.  The  trees  and  shrubs  too  of  this 
tropical  climate  are  no  doubt  very  ornamental ;  do  they 
beat  what  we  have,  in  beauty  and  in  luxuriance,  in  richness 
and  variety  ?    I  am  afraid  they  do. 

The  houses  have  all  flat  roofs,  for  the  most  part  built  of 
brick  and  plastered  over ;  and  the  plaster  from  some  cause 
or  other  soon  gets  very  dingy,  black  indeed,  more  or  less  in 
patches.  There  is  no  brightness  about  these  country-houses, 
neither  have  they  the  appearance  of  solidity  of  a  well-built 
stone  house  in  England. 

The  Governor- General's  palace  is  a  large  building,  painted 


BAYARD  TAYLORS  OBSERVATIONS.  39 

light  grey  and  well  kept  in  the  exterior.  It  is  in  Calcutta 
proper,  within  a  stone's  throw  of  this  hotel.  I  can  hear  from 
my  room  the  dinner  music  there  every  day.  The  building 
stands  on  some  twelve  acres  of  ground,  and  is  entered  on 
two  sides  through  handsome  arches  crowned  each  by  a  lion. 

There  are  many  public  buildings  in  course  of  erection  in 
Calcutta,  and  many  other  improvements  in  progress,  and  many 
more  contemplated ;  among  others,  a  railway  bridge  across 
the  Hoogly.  The  wonder  to  me  is  that  they  do  not  line  the 
city  bank  of  the  river  with  stone ;  at  present  cargoes  from 
ships  are  landed  in  boats,  and  unless  at  high  water,  the  goods 
are  brought  from  the  boats  through  a  foot  or  two  of  mud. 
The  vessels  usually  lie  along  some  one  or  two  hundred  yards 
off  the  bank.  Spring  tides  run  at  the  rate  of  six  or  seven 
knots  an  hour. 

Of  course  everywhere  about  Calcutta  the  ground  is  as  flat 
as  the  palm  of  your  hand.  Bents  are  high ;  the  C.'s  pay  for 
their  house  and  o£Sces  £1200  a  year. 

Hired  a  gharry  and  drove  through  the  Calcutta  Bazaar. 
It  is  a  stinking  place,  a  compound  of  vile  smells  assailing 
your  nose  from  the  time  you  enter  it  until  you  again  get  clear 
of  it.  An  open  drain  on  each  side  was  full  of  stagnant 
water.  There  may  be  difficulty  in  draining  the  city  effectu*- 
ally,  nevertheless  it  ought  to  be  done,  be  the  cost  what  it 
may.  The  fall  (average,  I  suppose)  from  this  cholera-breed- 
ing district  they  say  is  about  six  inches  in  the  mile  into  the 
river  at  low  water,  which  is  very  little. 

Bayard  Taylor  on  leaving  Calcutta  remarks :  '^  There  is 
one  feature  of  English  society  in  India,  however,  which  I 
cannot  notice  without  feeliug  disgusted  and  indignant;  I 
allude  to  the  contemptuous  manner  in  which  the  natives, 
even  those  of  the  best  and  most  intelligent  classes,  are  almost 
invariably  spoken  of  and  treated.  Social  equality,  unless  in 
some  rare  instances,  is  utterly  out  of  the  question.  The  tone 
adopted  towards  the  lower  classes  is  one  of  lordly  arrogance ; 
towards  the  rich  and  enlightened,  one  of  condescension  and 
patronage.  I  have  heard  the  term  '  niggers '  applied  to  the 
whole  race  by  those  high  in  office — ^with  the  lower  order  of 
English  it  is  the  designation  in  general  use,  and  this  too 


40  EXETER  HALL^STAFFORD  HOUSE. 

toward  those  of  our  own  Cancasian  blood,  where  there  is 
no  instinct  of  race  to  excuse  their  unjust  prejudice.  Why  is 
it  that  the  virtue  of  Exeter  Hall  and  Stafford  House  can 
tolerate  this  fact  without  a  blush,  yet  condemn  with  phari- 
saic  zeal  the  social  inequality  of  the  negro  and  the  white 
races  in  America  ?  " 


CHAPTER  m. 

Baogoon,  rioe-miIl%  large  Buddhiat  pagoda,  ita  begging-box— Women  the  bread- 
winnen — Maulmain,  not  progreaBing — '^iVowtra  Expedition" — B.  P.  S. 
K.  Companr'a  linea  of  ateamen — Penang — Tropical  yegetation — Nerer  be  too 
poaitiTe^Malacca,  tin  principal  export — Singapore,  atoike  of  Chineae,  exten- 
BTe  tnde^  manj  Gkrmana — Saigon,  the  Chineae  town — Large  export  of  rice 
— French  military  atation,  unheiJthy — Large  reyenue  on  sale  of  opium — 
Annamite  indolence— Hong-Kong— Flirtationa— The  Happy  Valley— Chineae 
criminala— Canton — ^Archdeacon  Qrey — Templea  of  the  Genii — ^Buddhiat 
monaatary  and  nunnery — Qambling — Opium-amoking — ^Reauurant — Tea- 
diTan — I^oar-milla— Jade-ahopa — iTory  turning — Lacker — Horn  lantema — 
Schoola — Weddinga  —  Pawnbrokera— Watch-towera  —  Shopa — Police — The 
** willow-pattern"  plate — Puniahmenta — ProTiaiona — Shoea  for  the  dead — 
Tradea. 

StA  Februaty. — Left  Calcutta  for  Singapore,  creeping  down 
the  Hooglj  in  the  Cheduba^  screw  steamer,  650  tons  and  120 
horse-power.  During  the  night  nearly  devoured  by  mos- 
quitoes. The  whole  country  all  the  way  down  on  both  sides 
quite  lowland  and  pretty  thickly  populated.  The  cultivation 
is  paddy  (rice  in  the  husk)  principally.  The  river  is  tortuous, 
and  in  places  sandbanks  run  across  it,  upon  which  some  of 
them  at  low  water  there  is  hardly  eight  feet  of  water ;  unless 
over  these  banks  the  channel  is  everywhere  deep  enough  for 
any  size  of  vessel.     Temperature  in  cabin  TO"",  aneroid  30*3. 

6^ — Beached  the  sandheads  7.30  p.m. 

Ithy  Sunday. — Ran  196  miles.  Temperature  82°,  aneroid 
steady. 

9th. — Anchored  alongside  the  wharf  at  Bangoon;  some 
fifty  ships  in  harbour.  The  season  for  shipping  rice  just  com- 
menced. Land  low  all  around.  The  town  laid  out  in  streets 
at  right  angles,  and  named  as  in  New  York,  but  not  much 
progress  made  in  building  houses.  Paid  a  visit  to  the  rice- 
mills  of  the  Oriental  Company.  They  do  the  work  with  a 
forty-horse  engine,  and  turn  out  270  tons  of  rice  mixed  with 
about  one-fifth  paddy  every  day.  This  mill  is  on  the  bank 
of  a  creek,  at  the  mouth  of  which  the  vessels  lay  for  taking 
in   cargo.     There  must  at  least  be   a  thousand  men  and 


42  RANGOON— RICE-MILLS. 

women  employed  here,  some  discharging  paddy,  others  in 
all  operations  of  the  milling  process,  and  others  again  loading 
it  in  lighters  to  be  conveyed  on  board  the  ships  waiting  for 
it  about  half  a  mile  off  at  the  month  of  the  creek.  There  is 
not  the  same  superabundance  of  labour  at  Rangoon  that  is 
found  in  some  other  parts  of  India.  At  these  paddy-mills 
the  women  who  were  employed  sewing  up  the  mouths  of  the 
sacks  filled  with  rice  for  shipment  were  earning  two  rupees 
a  day.  Here  in  Bangoon  they  are  obliged  to  look  outside 
for  labour ;  a  large  amount  of  it  is  drawn  from  Madras  and 
China^  and  some  from  the  Straits  of  Malacca,  Penang,  and 
elsewhere. 

Visited  another  large  milling  establishment  where  all  the 
work  was  done  by  hand.  There  were  one  hundred  pairs  of 
stones  going,  worked  by  two  hundred  men.  A  stick  about  two 
feet  long  projects  from  a  hole  in  the  centre  of  the  upper  mill- 
stone, and  attached  to  it  at  right  angles  is  another  stick  about 
the  same  length,  to  the  end  of  which  is  attached  a  pole  some 
ten  or  twelve  feet  long,  with  a  cross  piece  at  the  extremity ; 
by  alternately  pushing  and  drawing  back  this  pole  two  men 
keep  the  stones  going  round  pretty  fast,  so  fast  indeed  that 
they  manage  to  turn  out  about  2000  sacks  of  rice  daily. 

The  millers  buy  the  paddy  and  sell  the  rice  to  be  exported. 
The  present  price,  free  on  board,  is  five  shillings  and  eight- 
pence  the  cwt;  and  I  am  told,  even  at  that  low  figure  in 
Rangoon,  the  present  price  in  England  must  leave  a  loss. 
It  is  dirty  work  passing  through  a  paddy-mill  at  work; 
the  amount  of  dirty  dust  that  sticks  to  you  is  ten  times  as 
great  as  what  you  would  pick  up  from  any  bam  working  in 
England. 

Drove  to  the  large  pagoda,  and  on  the  way  looked  at  a 
pretty  little  lake,  on  the  borders  of  which  are  two  or  three 
comfortable-looking  bungalows.  This  pagoda,  or  Buddhist 
temple,  stands  upon  a  mound  to  the  top  of  which  the  ascent 
is  long  enough  to  be  gentle.  In  advancing  towards  it  you 
pass  over  a  bricked  road  a  couple  of  hundred  yards  long, 
covered  in  and  lined  with  gigantic  Buddhist  figures  made  of 
brick,  and  covered  over  with  a  sort  of  chunam,  giving  them 
the  appearance  of  stone  or  sometimes  even  of  marble.  There 
is  a  wonderful  resemblance  among  all  these  figures,  which 


BUDDHIST  PAGODA— BELLS.  43 

^present  Gnadama.  The  base  of  the  temple  must  be  in 
circumference  at  least  800  feet,  and  rises,  they  say,  to  the 
height  of  372  feet,  to  a  point  in  the  shape  of  an  nmbrella ; 
the  exterior  being  a  succession  of  steps  by  which  the  top,  I 
belieye,  might  be  reached ;  the  lower  parts  upwards  from  the 
base  being  hollowed  out  into  something  the  appearance  of 
a  bell  standing  upon  its  lip,  or  better,  perhaps,  like  a  huge 
speaking-trumpet 

The  pagoda  is  circular,  and  has  been  entirely  covered  with 
gilt ;  it  still  retains  a  considerable  amount  in  patches.  I 
was  informed  that  the  Government  is  about  to  regild  it  at  a 
cost  of  some  £20,000.  There  is  placed  on  a  platform  near 
its  base  a  huge  wooden  box,  very  strongly  made ;  in  the  lid 
are  innumerable  slits  just  large  enough  to  receive  a  rupee ; 
this  is  a  beggiDg-box.  The  faithful  make  pilgrimages  to 
this  pagoda  in  great  numbers  on  certain  festivals  during  the 
year^  and  the  Gh)vemment  no  doubt  count  on  raising  from 
them  for  this  holy  purpose  perhaps  sufficient  in  time  to 
entirely  regild  this  huge  temple.  It  was  fresh  gilded  some 
fifteen  years  ago. 

The  platform  upon  which  the  temple  stands  is  of  con- 
siderable area,  and  upon  it,  around  the  large  building,  though 
at  a  respectful  distance,  are  numerous  small  pagodas,  some 
of  them,  however,  50  feet  high,  and  chapels  filled  with 
gigantic  figures  of  Gnadama.  There  are  also  two  large 
bells  covered  with  inscriptions :  one  of  them  is  22^  feet  in 
circunference,  and  pretty  nearly  2  feet  thick  at  the  lip; 
it  must  be  10  feet  in  height.  They  are  both  hung  about  2 
feet  dear  of  the  platform,  and  are  sounded  by  being  struck 
on  the  lip  with  a  stout  piece  of  wood  which  lies  near  the 
bells.  One  of  these  bells  was  carried  away  by  the  English 
after  the  capture  of  the  pagoda  in  1825,  but  in  embarking  it 
it  was  dropped  overboard  and  there  left.  Sometime  after- 
wards the  Burmese  raised  and  replaced  it  in  its  old  position 
near  the  pagoda. 

Bained  more  or  less  all  day  of  the  10th,  and  during  the 
night  of  the  11th  heavily  for  many  hours;  an  occurrence 
unprecedented,  they  say,  in  Bangoon  in  any  former  month 
of  February. 

Strolled  about  the  town  and  bazaars.     The  women  seem 


44  POPULATION  OF  RANGOON. 

to  be  the  bread-winners  in  Bangoon ;  a  verj  large  portion  of 
the  work  fSalls  to  their  lot 

The  race,  both  men  and  women,  are  much  stronger  and 
stouter  than  the  Lower  Bengalee.  The  women  haye  their 
ears  bored,  the  holes  admitting  a  glass  or  other  ornament 
more  than  half  an  inch  in  diameter. 

At  5.30  A.  x.  under  weigh,  and  haye  now  all  sail  set,  with 
a  tolerable  breeze  of  northerly  wind,  which  helps  us  along 
considerably.    Temperature  ranging  from  1^  to  82^ 

The  ^^  Shway  Dagon,"  or  great  pagoda  of  Birmah  at 
Bangoon,  dates  back  to  some  centflries  before  the  Christian 
era,  but  must  have  tumbled  down  and  been  built  up  again 
many  times  since  then. 

The  Bangoon  district  contains  351,000  inhabitants,  and 
produces  a  reyenue  of  2,700,000  rupees.  The  annual  pro- 
duce of  paddy  is  about  300,000  tons,  and  of  sea-salt  62,000 
tons.  Of  the  population  2300  are  Europeans,  and  217,000  are 
Buddhists;  of  aborigines,  called  Talains,  116,000;  natiye 
Christians,  800;  the  remainder,  composed  of  Mahometans, 
3300;  Chinese,  2200;  Hindoos,  10,000.  There  are  1510 
yillages  in  the  district  The  Glovemment  officials  number 
190.    Temperature  SO**  to  Sff*. 

12^A. — 6  P.M.,  anchored  off  Amherst,  at  the  mouth  of  the 
riyer  that  leads  up  to  Maulmain,  remaining  until  11  A.1C., 
taking  the  first  of  the  flood,  arriying  at  Maulmain  at  2.15 
P.M.  The  passage  from  Amherst  of  32  miles  is  yery  tortu- 
ous, and  of  course  buoyed  all  the  way.  In  one  part  we  had 
less  than  two  fathoms  water.  At  high  tide  there  is  water 
enough  for  the  largest  yessels ;  the  rise  and  fall  of  spring 
tides  is  22  feet  Maulmain  has  been  in  possession  of  the 
British  since  1825.  For  some  time  afterwards  there  was  a 
large  trade  here,  the  interior  of  Burmah  receiying  its  supply 
of  manufactured  goods  through  this  port  Shipbuilding 
was  also  carried  on  extensiyely,  and  a  considerable  quantity 
of  produce,  in  the  shape  of  timber,  rice,  cutch,  and  other 
articles,  was  exported ;  but  since  the  acquisition  of  Bangoon 
by  the  British  the  trade  of  Maulmain  has  yery  much  de- 
creased, the  former  being  found  much  more  adyantageously 
situated  for  intercourse  with  the  interior,  and  at  the  same 
time  producing  a  much  larger  amount  of  rice  and  other  pro- 


MAULMAIN—NOVARA  EXPEDITION.  45 

duoe  for  exportation.  Maulmain,  therefore^  now  has  all  the 
appearance  of  a  place  that  has  been  commercially  of  much 
more  consequence  than  it  is  at  present 

13/A. — ^The  land  about  Maulmain  is  high  and  not  adapted 
for  the  cultivation  of  rice,  which  is  grown  only  to  the  extent 
of  some  20,000  tons,  whilst  Rangoon  produces  300,000 
tons. 

Of  the  two  places  Maulmain  is  much  the  prettiest  locality, 
the  hills  around  being  picturesque,  and  a  hundred  interesting 
views  might  be  made  from  it,  whilst  Rangoon  is  perfectly 
flat — a  mere  mud-bank  like  Calcutta. 

Visited  a  handsome  pagoda  200  feet  in  height,  situated 
at  the  top  of  a  hill  within  the  town.  The  views  from  the 
platform  are  particularly  pretty,  the  river  meandering  over 
a  vast  extent  of  country,  dotted  with  islands  covered  with 
palm-trees  and  other  verdure;  a  broken  range  of  higher 
limestone  hills  surrounding  the  whole,  distant  from  5  to 
20  miles.  There  are  many  other  pagodas  in  and  about 
Maulmain,  the  greater  part  of  them  situated  on  high 
ground. 

The  native  city  is  principally  on  the  plain,  and  thoroughly 
mixed  up  with  palm  and  other  trees,  covering  a  large  extent 
of  ground.  The  streets  are  all  at  right  angles  and  of  a  good 
width,  but  very  badly  kept ;  consequently  unpleasant,  if  not 
uncomfortable,  to  drive  through.  The  houses  are  of  wood, 
and  have  the  appearance  generally  of  the  Swiss  ch&let. 
There  are  many  small  steam  saw-mills,  and  one  steam  rice- 
milL 

We  got  rid  of  a  little  cargo  here  and  three  of  our  pas- 
sengers, and  in  return  received  on  board  one  passenger  and 
no  cargo.  Weighed  anchor,  and  going  down  the  river  against 
a  strong  flood  tide.  Temperature  last  night  in  cabin  IZ"*  to 
80*. 

These  Maulmain  people  have  a  Chinese  cast  of  counte- 
nance, but,  unlike  the  Chinese,  are  very  indolent ;  all  the  hard 
work  is  done  by  coolies  from  Madras.  The  women,  among 
the  natives,  are  clearly  the  most  industrious  part  of  the 
population,  which  amounts  to  some  80,000  souls. 

14M,  Sunday. — ^Temperature,  noon,  84** ;  latitude  13*  15'N., 
longitude  Vf  E.    Our  new  passenger.  Baron  Ransonnet,  is  a 


46  THE  CHEDVBA  LOST—PENANG. 

naturalist  going  to  Singapore  to  meet  the  Austrian  expedi- 
tion, consisting  of  two  screw  men-of-war,  one  the  Navaraj 
now  on  a  scientific  expedition  round  the  world.  Passed 
Cabosa,  Tennasirim,  and  Canaster  Island. 

\bth. — Temperature  82"*  to  86"*;  almost  calm;  course 
south.  Islands  in  sight  all  day — Chunu,  Perforated,  and 
other  islands.     Ran  212  miles. 

\&th. — Our  steamer,  the  Ckeduba  (name  of  a  port  on  the 
coast  of  Aracan),  is  one  of  twenty-five  steamers  belonging  to 
the  B.  P.  S.  N.  Company.  One  line  runs  along  the  coast  from 
Calcutta  to  Maulmain,  touching  at  five  ports — ^this  is  a 
weekly  line.  A  monthly  line  goes  to  Singapore  from  Cal- 
cutta, leaving  out  the  smaller  ports,  and  calling  only  at 
Eangoon,  Maulmain,  Penang,  and  Malacca — this  is  the  line 
I  am  travelling  by.  Another  line  runs  between  Calcutta 
and  Bombay,  calling  at  seventeen  ports  on  the  coast  There 
is  a  fourth  line,  from  Bombay  to  Bassorah  in  the  Persian 
Gulf.  They  are  all,  I  think  (at  any  rate  this  Cheduba  is), 
built  in  the  Clyde,  and  are  very  good  boats,  ranging  from 
323  to  1670  tons  burthen,  all  screws.* 

The  captain  of  the  Cheduba  gets  £40  per  month,  his 
table,  and  a  commission  upon  the  gross  freight,  which  may 
add  £10  a  month  more  to  his  pay ;  the  chief  o£Gicer  £16;  the 
chief  engineer  £22.  We  burn  about  seventeen  tons  coal  a  day, 
principally  from  England,  which  is  supplied  to  the  company, 
placed  at  the  several  ports  where  it  is  required,  at  £3  the  ton. 

lltfu — Anchored  at  Penang.  No  sooner  was  the  anchor 
let  go  than  we  had  a  number  of  boats  alongside,  manned 
principally  by  Malays.  I  had  previously  arranged  with 
Baron  Kansonnet  to  visit  the  waterfall,  and  ascend  the  Flag- 
staff Hill,  2500  feet  high,  for  the  views  which  are  to  be  had 
over  the  islands  and  mainland  of  the  straits.  We  took  the 
first  boat,  hired  a  gharry  to  take  us  to  the  foot  of  the  hill, 
four  miles  off,  and  a  couple  of  ponies  to  help  us  in  ascend- 
ing the  hill,  another  four  miles.  The  road  leading  from  the 
town  to  the  foot  of  the  hill  is  a  very  good  one,  over  flat 
ground  all  the  way,  planted  very  thickly  with  cocoa-nut 
palm  and  a  variety  of  other  tropical  trees.  Temperature 
in  the  shade  88^ 

*  The  Cluduha  on  her  next  yoyage  wai  lost  in  a  hurricane,  with  aU  haodf. 


WATERFALL^THE  BIG  TREE.  47 

On  arriying  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  we  took  a  road  leading 
to  the  waterfall^  which  we  were  told  we  might  reach  in  a 
quarter  of  an  honr^  and  then  we  had  it  fall  in  view.  Its 
height  may  be  some  50  or  60  feet;  the  width  at  the  top 
2  or  3  yards,  and  near  the  foot  of  the  fall,  where  the 
water  fell  in  a  perpendicular  stream,  and  consequently  more 
rapidly,  dwindles  down  to  2  or  3  feet.  In  the  rainy  season 
there  will  be  somewhat  more  water,  bat  never  enough  to 
warrant  the  correspondent  of  one  of  the  London  illustrated 
papers  placing  this  fall  side  by  side  with  the  pyramids  of 
Egypt,  and  describing  it  as  one  of  the  natural  wonders  of 
the  world.  From  the  foot  of  it  some  iron  pipes  (10  or  12 
inch)  have  been  laid  down,  which  conduct  a  supply  of  water 
to  the  town,  the  charge  being  two  dollars  a  month  for  each 
boose  indiscriminately,  which  I  am  told  is  much  complained 
of  by  the  poor,  who  think  they  ought  not  to  be  taxed  for 
water  at  the  same  rate  as  their  richer  neighbours.  When  I 
was  here  twenty-five  years  ago,  the  big  tree  was  the  prin- 
cipal attraction  for  visitors.  With  other  passengers  by  the 
Fire  Queen  (the  first  steamer  that  traversed  these  seas),  I 
remember  riding  twenty-six  miles  to  see  that  tree,  and  that 
was  under  a  July  sun.  The  tree — a  gum-tree — was  said 
to  be  upwards  of  300  feet  high  I  Alas  I  the  fate  that 
awaits  all  things  bom  into  this  world  has  befallen  it,  and 
it  no  longer  exists,  so  now  passengers  arriving  here  must 
fall  back  upon  the  waterfall  as  a  thing  to  be  visited.  The 
owners  of  ponies  and  gharries  must  live  at  somebody's 
expense. 

We  now  retraced  our  steps,  and  took  the  road  on  our 
ponies  leading  to  the  flagstaff.  Both  sides  of  the  road  for 
four  miles  is  thickly  studded  with  trees — a  primeval  forest — 
many  of  them  coming  up  from  a  depth  so  great  that  they 
must  equal  in  height  the  big  tree  of  which  I  have  spoken ; 
but  the  big  tree  stood  alone,  hence  the  reason  of  its  great 
celebrity ;  you  made  it  a  place  for  taking  luncheon,  and  I 
daresay  many  a  thousand,  bottles  have  been  emptied  under 

t 

On  the  road  to  the  flagstaff  you  cannot  turn  aside  an  inch ; 
whether  you  are  on  the  steep  hillside,  or  on  a  precipice  of 
hundreds  of  feet  deep  gaping  beneath  you,  it  is  equally  impos- 


48  MPSICAL  SO&IVDS  IN  THE  JUNGLE. 

Bible  to  budge  from  the  road,  the  hage  trees  in  this  tropical 
jungle  making  the  attempt  impossible ;  and  so  the  baron  felt 
in  scrambling  after  butterflies,  they  were  safe  from  his  net 
the  moment  they  were  otf  the  road ;  nevertheless  he  succeeded 
in  catching  a  goodly  number,  some  being  very  beautifuL 

We  were  particularly  struck  by  the  musical  sounds  which 
were  somehow  or  other  produced,  we  supposed,  by  some  large 
insect ;  the  baron  opined  it  to  be  a  sort  of  beetle,  which 
must  abound  in  millions  in  this  jungly  forest  The  sounds 
were  like  those  produced  by  the  Eolian  harp ;  they  could  be 
compared  to  nothing  else  that  I  know  of.  There  was  some 
little  animal  too  that  made  a  noise  like  the  sharpening  of  a 
saw,  curious,  but  not  musical.  The  whole  air  in  fact  teemed 
with  sound  from  without  the  depths  of  this  dense  forest 

The  views  we  had  from  the  flagstaff  of  the  straits  well 
repaid  us  for  any  exertion  we  had  made  to  attain  it,  and  the 
beauty  of  what  we  saw  was  not  a  little  increased  by  a  fair 
sprinkling  of  clouds  that  were  floating  overhead.  The 
governor  has  a  bungalow  here,  and  there  are  also  a  few 
others  to  which  people  come  from  below  in  the  season.  We 
went  into  one  of  these  bungalows  with  some  faint  notion 
that  it  might  be  a  house  of  entertainment,  and  were  met  by 
a  lady  who  undeceived  us,  and  rather  curtly  we  thought ; 
however,  as  we  were  retiring  after  having  apologised  for 
the  intrusion,  she  relaxed  a  little,  and  said  if  we  liked  she 
could  give  us  a  cup  of  tea.  Of  all  things,  we  exclaimed,  a 
cup  of  tea  was  what  we  should  like  to  have ;  so  the  good 
lady  immediately  began  to  busy  herself  in  preparing  it, 
while  we  went  out  for  half  an  hour's  stroll  around  the  crown 
of  the  hill  to  enjoy  the  views.  When  we  returned  the  tea 
was  ready,  so  we  sat  down  and  drank  tea  for  an  hour.  The 
lady  told  us  she  had  only  come  up  two  days  ago  to  this 
bungalow,  which  she  had  hired  from  the  Government  for  a 
month ;  it  was,  in  fact,  the  governor's  sanatorium.  Her 
husband  had  just  gone  down  the  hill.  She  had  with  her 
five  little  girls,  the  youngest  a  few  months  old,  and  the 
eldest  ten  years.  They  were  just  sufficiently  clothed,  and 
that  was  all,  and  in  that  state  they  romped  and  tumbled 
about  in  this  home  on  the  top  of  the  hill  to  their  heart's 
content     The  temperature  was  lO"*  below  what  we  had  left 


KICK  FROM  PONY— DON'T  BE  POSITIVE.       A^ 

on  the  plain  below.  Before  we  went,  Mrs  C.  apologised  for 
having  treated  ns  so  curtly  when  we  first  presented  ourselves, 
by  saying  that  two  officers  from  tbe  garrison  had  been  on 
the  hill  some  days  before,  and  had  entered  a  house  and 
behaved  themselves  in  a  very  improper  way,  and  she  thought 
at  the  moment  we  were  of  the  same  ilk.  We  bid  good-bye 
to  our  kind  hostess  and  commenced  the  descent  of  the  hill. 
Close  alongside  of  the  sanatorium  was  the  governor's  bun- 
galow,  from  which,  perhaps,  more  extensive  views  than  we 
had  so  much  enjoyed  might  have  been  had,  but  ^^ private" 
painted  in  large  letters  on  the  open  gate  deterred  us  from 
entering  the  grounds.  Merrily  we  proceeded  down  the  hill, 
occasionally  halting  to  entrap  a  butterfly  or  any  other  insect 
that  came  in  our  way. 

When  about  half-way  I  proceeded  on  alone  to  the  town, 
the  baron  remaining  behind,  to  make  use  of  a  couple  of  hours 
of  daylight  that  still  remained  to  him  to  do  some  sketching. 
I  walked  to  the  bottom  of  the  hill,  the  boy  leading  my  pony, 
and  just  as  I  was  about  to  mount,  the  vicious  little  brute — 
in  return,  I  suppose,  for  the  forbearance  I  had  hitherto  used 
towards  him — ^let  fly  at  me,  catching  the  calf  of  one  leg  and 
the  inside  of  the  knee  of  the  other  such  a  blow  that  I  was 
a  good  five  minutes  before  I  could  determine  whether  or  not 
the  animal  had  not,  for  the  time  at  least,  disabled  me. 
Fortunately,  however,  the  intense  pain  I  felt  at  first  soon 
subsided,  and  I  have  felt  no  ill-efiects  from  the  blow  since. 
I  rode  the  pony  to  the  town,  and  left  the  gharry  at  the 
bottom  of  the  hill  for  the  baron  when  he  had  done.  On 
arrival  at  the  town,  I  took  lunch  at  the  Chinaman's  Tye 
Sing,  and  bought  there  a  couple  of  "  Penang  lawyers," 
going  on  board  to  sleep.  . 

\%Ul — ^The  baron  had  the  disagreeable  duty  to  perform 
of  settling  with  the  gharryman  and  the  owner  of  the 
ponies,  which  often  results  when  no  previous  bargain  has 
been  made.  He  thought  he  had  managed  it  last  evening, 
but  he  and  I  had  no  sooner  landed  in  the  morning  than  we 
were  pounced  upon  by  the  owner  of  the  ponies,  who  asserted 
that  he  had  not  been  paid.  The  baron  was  positive  that  he 
had  given  him  five  rupees ;  the  owner  of  the  ponies  said  he 
had  not  received  a  stiver.    A  friend's  aid  was  called  in,  and 

D 


50  MALACCA^PORTUGUESE. 

a  great  amount  of  breath  and  some  precious  time  was 
wasted  on  the  matter.  The  baron  was  positive^  and  so  was 
the  owner  of  the  ponies;  so  at  last  we  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  five  rupees  must  have  been  paid  to  the  wrong  man, 
and  we  agreed  to  pay  them  over  again.  The  owner  of  the 
ponies  forthwith  proceeded  on  board  with  us  to  receive  his 
money,  for  the  vessel  was  about  starting.  On  going  to  his 
cabin  for  his  purse,  lo  and  behold  I  in  his  pocket  the  baron 
discovered  the  identical  five  rupees,  which  without  any  doubt  or 
scruple  he  would  have  sworn  he  had  paid  to  the  owner  of  the 
ponies ;  so  the  amende  honorable  was  made,  and  something 
more  was  given  to  the  honest  horsedealer.  At  8.30  A.K.  we 
were  on  our  way  towards  Malacca  and  Singapore.  Tempera- 
ture 84''  to  88^ 

19M. — 3  P.M.,  cast  anchor  off  Malacca,  which  is  a  very  quiet 
place.  We  landed  on  a  jetty,  and  walked  over  split  canes 
for  300  yards,  when  we  reached  a  greensward  of  some  ex- 
tent, over  which  we  passed  on  to  the  agent's  house,  who  made 
his  appearance  in  the  doorway  as  we  approached :  a  dapper, 
short,  thick,  little  man,  a  descendant  of  the  Portuguese  who 
reigned  paramount  in  this  part  of  India  some  two  or  three 
hundred  years  ago,  as  is  evidenced  by  the  tombstones  that 
cover  the  ashes  of  a  dozen  or  more  of  the  celebrities  of  those 
days,  still  to  be  seen  on  what  was  once  the  pavement  of  a 
ruined  old  church,  situated  on  a  little  green  hill  at  the  back 
of  the  agent's  house,  upon  which,  adjoining  the  church,  is 
a  small  lighthouse  and  also  a  flagstaff.  This  little  hill  was 
found  covered  with  rich  velvety  fresh-looking  turf,  not  very 
common  in  India.  The  dates  on  the  tombstones,  which  are 
of  granite,  ranged  between  1560  and  1670.  The  walls  of  the 
church  are  standing,  but  that  is  all  that  is  left  of  it ;  the  roof 
and  pavements  have  disappeared.  All  was  quiet  at  the  land- 
ing-place. As  we  descended  the  hill  to  look  for  a  gharry, 
at  the  bottom  of  it,  standing  watch  with  a  gun  in  his  hand 
over  the  mouth  of  a  drain,  out  of  which  smoke  was  issuing, 
stood  a  gentleman,  a  European ;  and  at  a  respectful  distance 
from  him  had  formed  a  group  of  Chinamen  and  Malays, 
young  and  old,  who  anxiously  watched  the  smoke  coming 
from  the  drain,  and  who  apparently  were  waiting  for  some- 
thing of  consequence  to  happen.    Alas  I  they  were  doomed  to 


RAT  HUNT— CROQUET.  51 

disappointment ;  the  raJt^  for  it  was  a  rat  that  had  created 
this  excitement  in  the  quiet  town  of  Malacca,  would  not  be 
smoked  out,  and  absolutely  refused  to  come  out  and  be  shot, 
notwithstanding  the  consequent  disappointment  to  so  many 
of  her  Majesty's  dark  lieges ;  so  we  got  into  our  gharry  and 
droye  about  and  round  the  town.  We  were  a  couple  of  hours 
driring  about,  and  returned  to  our  boat  on  the  jetty  well 
pleased.  All  the  streets  in  Malacca  are  in  good  order ;  the 
principal  one,  composed  of  Chinamen's  shops  and  joss-houses, 
is  reidly  a  very  nice  street  To  be  sure,  the  houses  are 
small,  but  they  are  well  kept,  and  everything  about  them 
bears  an  air  of  tidiness  and  cleanliness ;  but  the  same  quiet 
reigns  everywhere. 

On  the  outskirts  of  the  town  are  seen  many  comfortable 
bongalowB.  The  cocoa-nut  and  other  palms  grow  here 
very  luxuriantly.    The  principal  article  of  export  is  tin. 

As  we  went  on  board,  half-a-dozen  of  half-caste  ladies 
were  amusiug  themselves  on  the  piece  of  greensward  of 
which  I  spoke,  playing  croquet 

Half  an  hour's  pull  took  us  on  board,  and  in  half  an  hour 
more  we  were  under  weigh.  The  night  was  a  most  pleasant 
one,  the  thermometer  down  to  82''  in  the  cabin,  and  a  fresh 
breeze  blowing. 

TXMl — ^At  10.30  arrived  at  Singapore,  135  miles  from 
Malacca,  and  am  located  at  the  Hotel  d'Europe,  with  my 
travelling  companion  the  baron. 

21*^,  Sunday. — Singapore  contains  about  80,000  in- 
habitants, and  the  Straits  Settlement  a  population  of  30 
mUlions.  10,000  Chinamen  come  annually  to  Singa- 
pore, of  whom  some  8000  return  to  China,  all  with 
more  or  less  money.  The  Chinese  may  be  said  to 
regulate  the  holidays  in  Singapore;  from  three  to  fifteen 
days  at  the  commencement  of  the  new  year  are  the  only 
holidays  they  keep,  and  every  one,  European  as  well  as 
Malay,  is  obliged  to  keep  them  also.  When  the  Chinamen 
strike  work,  all  business  is  suspended.  They  are  the  head 
tod  front  of  business  here.  An  event  took  place  in  Hong- 
Kong  some  twenty  years  ago  which  illustrates  the  power  of 
the  Chinese  for  combination.  The  then  governor,  Davis, 
wanted  to  enforce  some  police  regulation  which  was  distasteful 


i 


52  SINGAPORE— CHINESE. 

to  the  Chinamen.  The  heads  of  the  Chinese  commnnitj 
waited  on  the  governor^  and  explained  to  him  the  ohjections 
raised  by  the  Chinese  to  the  contemplated  police  regulation. 
The  governor  was  finn,  and  determined  to  carry  it  out. 

On  the  morning  of  the  day  on  which  it  was  to  come  into 
operation  it  was  found  that  all  the  Chinamen  of  Hong-Kong| 
some  20,000,  had  passed  during  the  night  over  to  the  con- 
tinent. What  was  the  consequence  ?  Why,  the  1000  Euro- 
peans who  were  on  the  island  could  get  nothing  to  eat ;  the 
Chinese  were  everything — they  were  the  bakers,  the  butchers, 
and  the  greengrocers.  The  smallest  want  of  the  Europeans 
could  not  be  supplied.  Their  men  of  business,  the  tradesmen 
and  the  labourers,  had  all  gone.  This  state  of  things  lasted 
three  days,  at  the  expiration  of  which  the  governor  had  to 
send  to  say  that  if  they  would  come  back  the  obnoxious 
regulation  should  be  rescinded.  The  Europeans  could  not 
live  without  John  Chinaman. 

Singapore  is  a  free  port,  and  its  situation  makes  it  the 
emporium  for  nearly  all  the  produce  of  the  straits.  Pepper, 
sugar,  and  tapioca  are  the  principal  articles  produced  to  any 
extent  for  exportation ;  these  articles,  however,  form  but  a 
very  small  part  of  its  trade,  which  amounted  in  1868  to 
upwards  of  fifteen  millions  sterling. 

23rf. — ^The  French  steamer  arrived,  and  leaves  to-morrow 
for  Saigon  and  Hong-Kong ;  I  go  in  her. 

The  thermometer  has  ranged  every  day  since  I  arrived 
between  SO""  and  SB"",  and  a  little  rain  has  fallen  every 
other  day.  When  it  rains  the  weather  is  very  muggy  and 
disagreeable,  at  other. times  there  is  usually  a  breeze  blow- 
ing, which  tempers  the  excessive  heat  of  the  sun's  rays. 
The  Chinamen,  who  almost  crowd  the  streets,  rarely  ever 
wear  anything  on  their  heads,  and,  as  if  they  found  their 
hair  an  encumbrance,  their  heads  are  closely  shayed,  with 
the  exception  of  a  few  inches  of  the  crown,  from  which 
starts  the  long  tail  which  they  all  wear ;  and  if  their  natural 
hair  is  not  sufficient  for  the  purpose,  they  splice  a  piece 
on,  so  that  the  tail  generally  reaches,  either  naturally  or 
artificially,  within  a  few  inches  of  the  ground. 

Malays  and  Madrassies  are  also  numerous,  but  are  greatly 
outnumbered  by  the  Chinese.    Paid  a  visit  to  Messrs  Patter- 


GERMANS— PASSENGERS.  53 

son    k  Simon's    Docks  at  the  New  Port.     Masons'  wages 
fifteen   dollars    a   month,  and  coolies'  four — all  Chinamen. 
There  was  a  new  dock  in  coarse  of  constraction,  and  some- 
handsome  godowns  also.  # 

Among  mercantile  men,  the  Grermans  seem  to  me  to 
outnumber  the  English  very  considerably;  they  and  the 
Chinese  threaten  to  have  Singapore  to  themselves  in  the 
course  of  the  next  ten  years.  The  Germans  out  of  their 
own  country  stick  together  more  than  any  other  nation; 
whereyer  there  are  half-a-dozen  Germans,  there  is  sure  to  be 
a  German  club  and  a  philharmonic  society :  they  are  very 
musical;  even  in  the  bathroom  their  presence  is  known  by 
the  tuning  of  their  pipes.  All  young  Germans  met  with 
abroad  are  much  more  in  their  attainments  like  what  men 
should  be  than  the  generality  of  young  Englishmen.  It 
would  seem  that  the  education  they  receive  fits  them  better 
for  the  battle  of  life  than  that  which  is  common  with  us  ; 
certainly  it  does  in  one  particular,  that  of  a  knowledge  of 
l^^go&ges.  With  us  it  is  a  rare  thing  to  find  a  youngster 
going  abroad  who  can  speak  any  other  than  his  mother 
tongue  ;  I  have  hardly  ever  met  with  a  young  German  who, 
besides  his  own  langaage,  could  not  also  speak  French  and 
English. 

TAth. — ^Noon,  embarked  in  the  Dormat^  French  Messagerie 
boat,  for  Saigon  and  Hong-Kong. 

215th. — Noon,  had  made  a  run  of  155  miles.  Strongish 
N.E.  winds  against  us.  We  have  some  sixty  first-class 
passengers :  Frenchmen  for  Saigon,  Germans  for  China, 
Spaniards  for  Manilla,  Dutch  and  Belgian  priests  for  beyond 
Pekin,  and  Englishmen  for  Hong-Eong.  Two  ladies  with 
their  husbands,  and  one  going  to  look  after  hers. 

The  captain  and  o£Gicers  are  all  hail-fellows  well  met 
among  themselves,  and  mix  also  very  freely  with  the  pas- 
sengers, to  an  extent  I  have  never  witnessed  on  board  a 
P.  and  O.  boat  The  Donnal  is  500  horse-power,  and 
upwards  of  2000  tons  burthen.  Temperature  84**  Fahr.  in 
the  cabin.     A  shower  of  rain  this  morning. 

26^. — Ban  213  miles  against  a  strong  east  wind. 

21th. — 4.80  P.M.,  close  under  Cape  St  Jaques,  where  we 
took  a  pilot     The  monsoon  has  been  strong  the  last  two 


54  SAIGON-^CHOLON. 

days.  With  the  exception  of  an  occasional  shower,  the 
weather  has  been  fine  and  bright.  8  p.m.,  ran  aground 
twenty  miles  below  Saigon  with  an  ebb  tide ;  so  here  we  are 
until  four  or  five  in  the  morning. 

I  have  been  wondering  ever  since  we  entered  the  riveri  that 
the  pilot  would  undertake  to  carry  us  up  at  night,  even  with 
the  moon,  drawing  as  we  do  nineteen  feet  water;  for  the  river  is 
narrow,  and  in  places  very  tortuous  and  not  buoyed.  From 
the  cape  to  the  town  of  Saigon  the  distance  is  fifty  miles. 
From  Singapore  to  Saigon  there  are  644  miles.  Cape  St  Jaques 
is  high  land,  with  a  light  on  it  that  may  be  seen  in  clear 
weather  some  thirty  miles  off ;  but  after  passing  the  cape  and 
entering  the  river,  the  land  on  both  sides  is  quite  low  and 
uncultivated  so  far  as  we  have  come,  the  mangroves  grow- 
ing down  everywhere  to  the  water's  edge. 

28^A. — Got  afloat  sooner  than  anticipated,  reaching  our 
anchorage  at  Saigon  at  2  p.m. 

\%t  March. — This  port  is  completely  land-locked,  and 
there  is  room  enough  for  any  number  of  vessels,  though 
opposite  the  town  I  do  not  think  the  river  is  half  a  mile  wide. 
There  were  some  thirty  merchantmen  loading  rice;  three 
English  flags  are  all  I  saw  among  them — Dutch  and  French 
principally.  There  are  four  or  five  old  line-of-battle  ships 
which  did  good  service  here  before  the  French  built  at  all, 
and  they  are  still  turned  to  some  good  use,  I  daresay. 

Of  small  craft  in  the  port  and  creek  leading  up  to  Cholon, 
a  Chinese  town  containing  some  40,000  inhabitants,  the  creek 
pretty  well  crowded.  Cholon  is  four  miles  from  Saigon. 
A  great  extent  of  rough  ground  bordering  one  of  the  roads 
leading  to  it,  was  covered  as  far  as  I  could  see  with  massive 
stone  graves,  of  some  antiquity  many  of  them,  intermixed 
with  recent  unburnt  brick  graves.  The  town  of  Cholon  is 
almost  entirely  Chinese,  with  a  very  slight  admixture  of 
Annamite.  The  shops,  many  of  them,  were  well  filled  with 
the  produce  of  the  East  principally,  and  a  sprinkling  of 
European  goods.  The  creek  I  spoke  of  runs  right  through 
the  town,  and  possibly  extends  far  beyond  it,  at  least  I  saw 
no  termination  to  it.  It  is  about  twenty-five  yards  wide 
where  it  passes  through  the  town,  and  with  the  exception  of 
a  narrow  passage  in  the  centre,  was  completely  covered  with 


FRENCH  COLONY  NOT  HEALTHY.  55 

boats,  many  of  them  fonning  permanent  residences  for  the 
oocnpiers.  On  the  banks  of  the  creek  Chinamen  were  busily 
employed  in  the  manipulation  of  rice  and  paddy,  the  former 
the  great  article  of  export  from  Saigon,  of  which  large  heaps 
were  lying  about 

Of  course  there  are  many  Chinese  temples  in  Saigon.  I 
walked  into  one  of  the  most  considerable,  where  one  or  two 
persons  were  performing  their  devotions.  The  Chinese  are 
not  at  all  jealous  of  foreigners  visiting  their  joss-houses. 
Yon  may  go  in  and  minutely  examine  the  whole  contents  of 
the  place  without  hindrance  or  interruption. 

The  French  have  a  considerable  military  station  at  Cholon  ; 
altogether,  I  am  told,  they  have  some  10,000  men  in  the 
colony,  among  whom  there  is  rather  an  excessive  mortality. 

The  sale  of  opium  is  farmed  out  by  the  Government,  and 
a  largish  revenue  derived  from  the  operation. 

The  Annamites,  I  am  told,  are  very  indolent ;  they  are 
entirely  occupied  in  agricultural  pursuits — the  growing  of 
rice  principally,  in  which  branch  of  industry  the  Chinese  are 
also  largely  occupied. 

Only  ten  years  have  elapsed  since  the  French  took  pos- 
session of  Saigon,  and  certainly  much  has  been  done  by 
them*  Many  handsome  public  buildings  have  been  erected, 
and  considerable  progress  made  otherwise  in  the  building  of 
a  town.  Farms  and  kitchen-gardens  line  the  main  road 
between  Saigon  and  Cholon,  and  some  pretty-looking 
bungalows  have  been  erected.  In  fact  there  can  be  no 
doabt  that  the  place  is  destined  to  become  of  commercial 
importance.    The  present  governor  is  a  rear-admiral. 

Saigon  at  present  is  not  a  healthy  place,  but  by  drainage 
and  otherwise  the  Government  will  no  doubt  soon  produce 
an  improvement  in  this  respect  We  have  a  priest  and  two 
sirters  of  mercy  from  Saigon,  invalided  passengers,  with  us. 

At  2  A.M.  this  morning  weighed  anchor  and  came  down 
the  river,  and  are  now,  at  3  p.m.,  again  contending  with 
a  strong  N.E.  monsoon,  which  threatens  to  lengthen  our 
passage  by  a  day  or  two  to  Hong-Kong.  At  noon  we  were 
eighty-seven  miles  from  Saigon.  The  whole  distance  to 
Hong-Kong  is  915  miles. 

2d. — ^Ean  193  miles.      We  keep  in  sight  of  land  as  we 


56  HONG-KONG— FLIRTATIONS. 

progress,  sometimes  passing  within  five  or  six  miles  of  the 
projecting  headlands.  It  seems  to  be  high  land  all  along 
the  coast.     The  weather  gets  cooler,  the  temperature  in  cabin 

/O    . 

3rf. — Fine  calm  weather  since  noon  yesterday.  Ran  249 
miles.  Latitude  16"  35"  N.,  longitude  108'  48'  of  Paris.  We 
have  not  seen  the  land  to-day ;  there  is  a  curve  in  the  coast 
here,  which  of  course  we  do  not  follow.  Temperature  82® 
Fahr.,  aneroid  30*2. 

\th. — At  noon  we  were  155  miles  from  Hong-Kong; 
calm  weather  and  sea  smooth.  Ran  231  miles.  Tempera- 
ture 78°  Fahr.  The  island  of  Hainan  too  distant  to  be  seen ; 
no  land  in  sight.  I  have  been  fortunate  in  this  vessel  in 
having  a  cabin  with  four  berths  in  it  to  myself.  A  fair 
table  is  kept ;  some  forty  sit  down  to  dinner  daily :  every- 
thing clean  and  well  appointed,  a  great  improvement  in  this 
respect  on  any  of  the  P.  and  0.  boats  that  I  have  travelled  in. 
5M. — Anchored  in  Hong-Kong,  having  laid  by  for  some 
hours  during  the  night  in  consequence  of  thick  fog. 

The  harbour  was  well  filled  with  shipping;  dozens  of 
boats  with  Chinese  families  in  them,  in  many  cases  with 
mother,  father,  and  children  of  all  ages,  alongside  the 
moment  we  anchored. 

Weather  cool,  temperature  in  my  room  at  the  Hong- 
Kong  Hotel  70^  We  had  not  many  passengers  for  this 
port ;  they  are  most  of  them  going  on  either  to  Manilla  or 
China,  The  two  Belgian  priests  go  on  to  Mongolia,  some  fifty 
leagues  beyond  Pekin ;  poor  fellows,  they  are  about  to 
retire  from  the  civilised  world,  and  therefore  might  well  be 
pardoned  for  having  done  a  little  flirting  on  board  the 
Donnaij  with  a  pair  of  sisters  of  mercy  who  came  passengers 
from  Saigon.  But  the  priests  and  the  nuns  were  not  the 
only  people  who  flirted ;  we  had  other  ladies  on  board — 
one  married  to  a  gentleman  going  to  Shanghae,  another  also 
with  her  husband,  an  employ^  in  the  Ms.  Imperial,  and  the 
third  a  lady  going  to  meet  her  husband.  This  last  was  a 
very  thin  dark-complexioned  little  woman  of,  say,  twenty- 
seven.  She  herself  might  have  been  put  into  a  quart  pot, 
or  at  any  rate  into  a  half-gallon  measure,  but  she  was  so 
furbelowed  from  the  crown  of  her  head  to  the  sole  of  her 


1-  -  • 


UEUTENANT BUCKLE— HAPPY  VALLEY.        57 

foot,  that  in  her  feathers  she  really  looked  something ;  hut 
she  was  in  truth  hardly  anything.  She  had  several  admirers 
on  board :  one  was  a  stout,  clumsy-looking,  shortsighted,  red- 
and-white  young  Grerman,  who  was  very  devoted  to  her ;  the 
doctor  was  another ;  but  neither  of  these  gentlemen  seemed 
to  take  her  fancy.  A  young  Frenchman  about  her  own  com- 
plexion, small,  and  of  the  cock-sparrow  cut,  but  of  very 
nice  manners,  without  any  apparent  effort  became  her 
fayonrite.  The  other  two  ladies  having  their  husbands  with 
them^  of  course  were  not  in  a  position  to  flirt,  so  they  became 
jealons  of  the  little  lady,  and  never  spoke  a  word  to  her, 
bat  cnielly  criticised  her,  I  often  looked  at  the  favoured  one, 
and  thought  to  myself,  what  is  there  about  the  favourite  that 
has  secured  so  decided  a  preference  over  the  other  admirers 
of  this  little  woman?  He  is  very  small,  and  very  cock- 
sparrowish;  but  his  manners  were  good — I  suppose  the 
charm  lay  there. 

We  had  on  board  also  a  dozen  Spaniards  going  to 
Manilla,  employes  under  the  new  rigime  (Republican),  all 
going  out  to  fill  offices  of  one  sort  or  another,  and  what 
a  noisy  set  they  were  I  One  of  them  was  a  young  fellow 
upwards  of  six  feet  high,  whom  they  called  emphatically  the 
Nilio  (baby),  and  a  very  noisy  Nifio  he  was.  A  Prussian 
count,  and  a  young  fellow,  his  brother-in-law,  born  in  Paris 
and  educated  in  England,  completed  our  party. 

Itlu — Lieutenant  Buckle,*  of  the  Surveyor  -  GeneraPs 
Office,  kindly  put  down  my  name  at  the  club  reading-room, 
which  was  a  great  convenience  to  me.  Took  a  walk  with 
him  to  the  Happy  Valley.  Weather  showery ;  temperature 
72*"  in  room,  aneroid  30*5. 

8M.— Walked  to  top  of  Flagstaff  Hill,  height  1760  feet 
It  was  foggy,  so  we  saw  nothing  from  the  very  top,  but 
lower  down,  at  the  gap,  the  panoramic  view  of  Hong-Kong, 
town,  harbour  and  shipping,  the  small  islands  and  the 
opposite  coasts  of  Kow-Loon,  is  very  pretty.  The  governor 
has  a  bungalow  at  the  top  of  the  hill  to  which  he  goes  in 
the  hot  season.  There  are  no  trees  anywhere  near  it ;  some 
young  things,  banyan-trees  principally,  have  just  been  planted 

*  Thia  smUant  young  officer  wai  killed  heading  hia  foUowers  at  Coomaaaie. 


0 


S8  FLOGGING— SHUMIEN. 

round  about  it.  If  they  grow^  in  time  that  which  must  be 
so  desirable,  shade,  will  be  obtained. 

Whilst  waiting  at  the  Surveyor-General's  Office  for 
Lieutenant  Buckle,  a  turnkey  came  up  in  charge  of  six 
prisoners  with  "  Victoria  Gaol "  in  large  letters  on  the  back 
of  their  greatcoats.  I  got  into  conversation  with  him ;  he 
told  me  that  there  were  107  Europeans  in  the  gaol,  and  420 
Chinese.  It  seems  that  lately  flogging  has  been  adopted  as 
a  punishment  for  Chinese  criminals,  and  the  result  has  been 
that  crime  among  them  has  very  sensibly  diminished.  At 
one  time  the  Victoria  G^ol  was  inadequate  to  the  requirements^ 
and  a  large  gaol  was  consequently  erected  on  the  Kow-Loon 
side ;  but  since  flogging  has  been  introduced  the  gaol  has 
not  been  wanted  at  all,  and  is  now  quite  empty — so  much 
for  flogging. 

\2th — Went  on  board  a  steamer,  and  at  8  A.M.  started  for 
Canton— latitude  27'  1'  N.,  longitude  113"  14'  B. — on  the 
Chukiang  or  Pearl  river,  arriving  at  4  p.m.  Showery  weather. 
Passed,  coming  down,  the  American  frigate  Susquehanna^ 
Admiral  Bowan. 

\Zth — Under  the  guidance  of  Archdeacon  Grey  conmienced 
sight-seeing. 

Shumien  is  the  name  of  the  foreign  settlement  in  Canton ; 
it  is  2850  feet  b^  950  feet  in  its  greatest  breadth. 

The  five  Genii. — Five  genii  rode  through  the  city  mounted 
on  rams,  and  promised  great  prosperity  to  it ;  they  dis- 
appeared, and  the  rams  were  turned  to  stone ;  the  five 
stones  were  placed  in  a  temple,  and  became  the  object  of 
,  worship.  This  temple  was  destroyed  by  fire  some  few  years 
ago,  and  the  stones  were  removed  to  the  temple  in  which 
I  saw  them.  Two  priests  who  had  charge  of  the  temple, 
of  whose  carelessness  the  fire  was  supposed  to  be  the 
consequence,  were  made  to  stand  in  the  street  with  their 
heads  through  a  large  board,  exposed  to  the  public  gaze  for 
a  fortnight,  as  a  punishment  for  their  carelessness.  A 
theatre  stood  opposite  the  temple.  It  was  said  by  wise  men 
that  the  theatre  had  something  to  do  with  the  destruction 
of  the  temple,  and  it  was  consequently  pulled  down.  The 
five  stones  were  said  to  be  like  unto  rams ;  I  could  see  no 
resemblance. 


CANTON— SIGHTSEEING.  59 

There  is  the  Temple  of  the  Five  Hundred  Genii^  of  the  Gk>d 
of  Wisdom,  and  others. 

The  Buddhist  Monastery, — Our  luncheon,  which  we  had 
with  US,  was  produced  and  eaten  here,  the  monks  kindly 
supplementing  it  with  some  tea.  From  all  I  hear  these 
Buddhist  monks  lead  just  about  the  same  sort  of  active  and 
moral  lires  that  the  monks  do  in  the  common  run  of  Roman 
Catholic  monasteries.    There  were  180  monks. 

The  Buddhist  Nunnery. — The  nuns,  thirty  in  number,  I  saw, 
were  all  old  and  ugly :  one  of  them  was  employed  in  teaching 
two  little  girls,  who  gave  us  a  specimen  of  what  they  could 
do ;  they  were  about  six  or  seven  years  of  age,  and  could 
read  very  fluently.  Among  these  nuns  was  a  divorced  wife 
who  had  found  a  refuge  here,  she  looked  very  cheerful. 

The  Beggars^  Refuge^  where  they  gather  to  pass  the 
night.  I  am  told  the  beggars  come  here  generally  to  die. 
We  saw  a  corpse  stretched  on  the  ground,  covered  with  a 
mat,  waiting  interment. 

The  Gambling-Skop. — ^As  we  entered  an  alarm  was  created, 
and  a  thief  tiding  advantage  of  it  clutched  some  money 
which  was  lying  upon  the  table.  He  was,  however,  laid  hold 
of,  but  as  there  was  evidently  about  to  be  a  row,  we  thought 
it  as  well  to  clear  out  from  among  such  gentry.  Gambling- 
houses  in  China  are  unlawful  establishments,  but  a  bribe 
to  a  mandarin  secures  impunity. 

The  Opium-emoking  Saloon. — ^There  were  some  ten  men 
in  the  saloon  when  we  entered.  When  an  opium-smoker 
comes  in  he  lies  down  on  the  divan,  placing  his  head  upon  a 
little  wooden  pillow.  There  is  a  light  close  to  his  hand  at 
which  he  melts  the  opium :  it  is  in  the  shape  of  gum ;  bit  by 
bit,  and  with  a  long  needle,  he  pokes  it  into  a  pipe,  and  when 
sufficiently  charged  he  lights  and  smokes.  This  operation  is 
repeated  until  the  smoker  is  knocked  down  and  becomes 
quite  unconscious,  and  in  this  state  he  remains  a  considerable 
time.  One  of  these  smokers  came  to  whilst  we  were  there, 
a  more  wretched-looking  being  I  do  not  think  I  ever  beheld. 
From  this  general  saloon  we  moved  into  another,  more 
private.  There  was  one  individual  who  had  begun  his  first 
pipe.  He  told  us  he  had  been  a  smoker  of  opium  for  thirty 
years,  and  a  very  cadaverous  fellow  he  was.     The  expression 


6o  OPIUM  SMOKING— TEA-SALOON. 

on  the  faces  of  all  these  men  was  what  joa  might  conceive 
would  be  that  of  a  person  awakening  from  a  horrible  dream, 
and  certainlj  the  opposite  of  what  tou  woold  expect  to  find 
in  the  face  of  one  awakening  from  Eljsinm. 

The  Restaurant  is  xenr  clean.  The  tit-bits  of  cats  and 
dogs  are  xery  nicelj  dished  np,  and  the  prices  of  all  these 
delicacies  clearly  stated  in  sereral  lists  hanging  np  about  the 
room.  There  are  many  things  the  Chinese  turn  to  account  as 
articles  of  food,  which  probably  no  other  people  make  use  of  for 
such  a  purpose,  as  the  root  of  the  lotus,  the  young  bamboo,  and 
pig's  skin  are  among  the  number ;  indeed  there  is  no  part 
of  bird  or  beast  they  kill  for  food  which  is  not  eaten.  I 
may  mention  the  mode  of  killing  animals.  To  one  end  of  a 
piece  of  stout  bamboo  is  affixed  a  noose,  the  line  to  which  is 
passed  through  the  hollow  bamboo  (about  four  feet  long) ;  the 
head  of  the  cat  or  dog  is  passed  quietly  into  the  noose, 
which  is  tightened  by  pulling  the  string  at  the  other  end  of 
the  bamboo,  so  that  in  this  way  the  executioner  sayes  him- 
self from  being  either  bitten  or  scratched. 

The  Tea-Saloon. — Small  tables,  neatly  arranged,  covered 
the  floor  of  this  large  room,  and  upon  each  was  a  tray  con- 
taining a  dozen  kinds  of  cakes  and  sweets.  The  barkeeper 
was  posted  close  to  the  door ;  as  a  visitor  rose  from  the  table, 
a  waiter,  who  had  been  either  watching  or  waiting  upon  him, 
instantly  cries  out  at  the  top  of  his  voice  what  he  has  to  pay, 
and  the  barkeeper  bars  the  way  until  the  amount  is  paid. 
The  place  was  very  clean,  and  a  deluge  of  little,  very  little, 
brown  earthen  teapots  were  there  ready  for  use. 

The  Flour-Mills. — A  dozen  pairs  of  stones  were  being 
driven  by  as  many  small  oxen ;  each  ox  had  a  jar  fastened 
under  his  belly  to  catch  the  urine,  for  cleanliness'  sake,  and 
to  be  turned  to  account  also.  Some  writers  have  stated  that  the 
Chinese  are  not  consumers  of  wbeaten  flour ;  it  is  true  they 
do  not  seem  to  make  it  into  loaves,  but  in  the  shape  of  cakes 
there  must  be  a  large  consumption.  The  process  of  sifting 
or  bolting  the  flour  is  curious,  and  must  be  as  old  as  it  is 
simple. 

Jade-stone  Workshops.  — There  is  a  whole  street  of  these. 
The  jade-stone  is  turned  into  all  sorts  of  ornaments  for  the 
person ;  large  rings  for  the  arms  and  legs,  rings  for  the  fingers, 


SCHOOLS—  WEDDINGS.  6 1 

earrings,  brooches,  and  a  great  variety  of  other  articles. 
The  wire  saws  in  use  for  catting  up  the  small  blocks  of  jade 
— a  single  wire  strung  on  a  bow,  and  worked  by  two  men. 
A  number  of  circular  saws  were  in  operation  also,  from  one 
to  two  inches  in  diameter,  for  cutting  up  jade,  worked  like  a 
lathe.  There  is  another  street  of  shops  in  which  the  manu- 
factured articles  are  offered  for  sale ;  these  shops  are  very 
handsomely  fitted  up. 

Itory^tuming  Shops, — In  one  of  these  I  witnessed  the 
process  of  making  ivory  balls  one  within  another,  and  had 
it  explained  to  me. 

Lacker^fcare  Shops. — Lacker  is  a  substance  which  exudes 
from  a  tree.  At  first  it  is  white,  and,  like  indiarubber, 
becomes  black  immediately  after  exposure  to  the  atmosphere. 
The  article  to  be  operated  on  gets  several  coats  of  this 
lacker,  and  when  dry,  the  figures  or  patterns  which  are 
meant  to  be  gilded  are  then  drawn,  and  covered  with  a  sub- 
stance the  component  parts  of  which  I  forget  A  liquid 
preparation  of  gold  is  then  applied,  which  adheres  to  the 
pattern,  but  makes  no  impression  on  the  remaining  surface. 

Shops  where  large  horn  lanterns  are  made. — These  lanterns 
are  made  by  soldering  together  innumerable  small  pieces  of 
horn  with  a  heated  pair  of  nippers.  The  joinings  are  after- 
wards scraped  down  to  the  same  thickness  as  the  rest  of  the 
lantern,  and  become  imperceptible. 

Schools. — ^Visited  several ;  the  pupils  were  seated  at  desks 
pretty  much  as  in  some  of  our  own  schools.  There  was 
one  school,  from  its  situation  close  to  the  temple  of  the 
Grod  of  Wisdom,  I  was  told,  was  always  well  attended. 

Wedding  Processions. — We  were  fortunate  in  seeing  two 
of  these,  in  which  the  bride  was  being  conducted  in  a  sedan 
chair  to  the  home  of  the  bridegroom,  preceded  by  bands  of 
music,  and  accompanied,  one  of  them,  by  several  of  hier 
brothers.  The  presents  of  the  bridegroom  were  also  carried 
in  the  procession,  with  dwarfed  fruit  -  bearing  trees  and 
flowers,  symbolical  of  the  wishes  of  the  happy  pair  that  they 
might  be  blessed  with  numerous  offspring. 

Panmbroker's  Shop. — We  visited  a  large  establishment, 
and  were  allowed  to  go  through  it.  It  consisted  of  four 
stories — a  large  tower  of  four  stories — where  the  pawned  goods 


62  THROWING  VITRIOL  ON  ASSAILANTS. 

were  stowed  awaj  on  open  shelves,  and  labelled  very  methodi- 
cally. On  the  walls  round  the  flat  roof  were  piles  of  stones 
for  throwing  down  on  the  heads  of  assailants  in  case  of 
attack.  There  were  also  some  jars  of  vitriol  kept  ready,  and 
some  large  syringes,  three  feet  long,  for  squirting  it  down 
upon  the  heads  of  assailants.  The  tower,  apart  from  the 
shop  where  the  pawned  goods  were  kept,  was  provided  with 
iron  doors  and  windows,  and  was  considered  fireproo£ 
Goods  unredeemed  at  the  end  of  three  years  are  sold. 

We  had  a  capital  view  of  the  city  from  the  top  of  this 
tower,  and  so  closely  packed  together  are  the  houses  that  we 
could  not  see  one  single  street ;  to  be  sure,  the  streets  are 
very  narrow,  varying,  say,  from  five  to  seven  feet  wide,  and 
nearly  all  of  them  running  at  right  angles  to  each  other. 
At  a  distance  apart  of  a  few  hundred  yards  are  high  skeleton 
watch-towers  all  over  the  city,  where  watchmen  are  posted 
night  and  day  to  give  alarm  in  case  of  fire.  Great  numbers 
of  the  houses  are  two  stories,  and  occupy  a  great  deal  of 
ground.  We  visited  two  large  handsome  houses,  belonging 
to  landed  proprietors ;  the  hall  in  both  of  them  was  hung 
with  tablets  detailing  the  genealogical  history  of  the  occupants; 
they  were  handsomely  furnished  according  to  Chinese  notions ; 
in  both  of  them  there  were  resident  tutors  instructing  the 
boys  of  the  family. 

The  streets  are  very  clean,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  out- 
of-the-way  corners  we  visited,  and  paved  generally  with  blocks 
of  granite  placed  across  them.  During  our  whole  walk  we 
met  with  nothing  to  offend  in  the  least  degree  either  our 
eyes  or  our  olfactories.  Thelnost  fastidious  lady  might  have 
been  with  us  the  whole  time,  and  she  would  have  encountered 
nothing  in  the  slightest  degree  offensive. 

The  Chinese  shops  have  no  windows,  and  the  whole  front 
is  open.  In  the  larger  establishments  light  is  also  admitted 
from  the  roof,  and  sometimes  from  the  back. 

We  met  during  the  whole  day  but  one  solitary  policeman, 
and  not  a  single  soldier  anywhere.  Archdeacon  Grey,  who 
was  welcomed  with  smiles  everywhere  we  went,  for  he  is 
evidently  a  great  favourite  with  the  Chinese,  says  that 
Canton  is  the  quietest  and  best  -  regulated  city  in  the 
world. 


WILLO  W-PA  TTERN  PLATE.  t^ 

The  foreign  settlement,  which  is  really  an  island,  two 
sides  of  it  skirting  the  river,  and  the  rest  of  it  boanded  by  a 
creek,  has  some  very  good  houses  and  a  good  church.  The 
French  part  has  not  a  single  building  upon  it.  Altogether 
the  settlement  must  be  a  hundred  acres  in  extent  A  very 
large  and  handsome  French  cathedral,  is  being  erected  on 
the  site  where  Yeh's  palace  stood ;  it  is  of  granite  brought 
from  Hong-Kong. 

The  river  is  a  busy  scene,  covered  as  it  is  with  thousands 
of  boats  of  all  sorts  and  sizes,  and  all  forming  permanent 
dwellings;  they  are  consequently  manned  by  men,  women, 
and  children.  It  seems  wonderful  how  the  inmates,  crowded 
as  they  are,  can  keep  them  so  remarkably  clean  ;  for  of  course 
all  their  household  duties  are  performed  in  them — cooking, 
washing,  Ac. 

There  is  a  story  attached  to  the  little  garden  which  was 
selected  centuries  ago  as  a  pattern  for  plates.  The  owner 
of  the  garden  had  a  daughter  who  was  affianced  to  a  young 
man,  her  father's  choice,  but  for  whom  she  did  not  care,  for 
she  had  chosen  a  lover  herself  much  more  to  her  liking,  as 
frequently  happens  when  fathers  choose  husbands  for  their 
daughters  without  previously  consulting  them.  The  lovers 
•were  accustomed  to  meet  in  this  little  garden,  but  as  their 
ill-luck  would  have  it,  they  were  at  last  discovered  in  the 
garden  by  her  father,  who,  infuriated  of  course,  gave  chase 
to  the  guilty  pair,  when,  wonderful  to  relate,  just  as  he  was 
about  to  lay  hands  on  them,  the  God  of  Love,  taking  com- 
passion upon  his  victims  or  votaries,  turned  them  into  doves, 
which  are  now  represented  perched  upon  a  tree  in  the  cele- 
brated willow  pattern  for  plates.  It  was  this  little  history 
which  induced  the  Chinese  to  choose  for  their  plates  this 
world-wide  pattern. 

Saw  a  lockup-house  where  a  man  was  confined,  under- 
going punishment,  his  head  through  a  square  board  five  or  six 
inches  in  diameter.  A  poulterer's  shop,  or  rather  a  street 
full  of  poulterers'  and  butchers'  shops,  in  which  innumerable 
rats,  cats,  dogs,  and  ducks  were  exposed  for  sale,  as  well  as 
pork,  the  entrails  and  every  other  part  of  these  being 
prepared  for  food. 

Saw    cotton-printing,    dyeing    and    calendering    cotton; 


64  NURSERY  GARDENS-^G OLD- FISH. 

carding  wool ;  manufacturing  silk  stockings  for  small-feet 
women;  a  variety  of  crape  shawls  for  different  markets; 
large  highly-embroidered  silk  banners  presented  by  relations 
to  fathers  when  they  attain  their  sixty-first  year. 

Noticed  several  young  men  with  heavy  chains  round  their 
necks  and  bodies,  with  stones  fastened  to  the  end  of  the 
chains,  exposed  in  the  streets  for  being  mauvais  sujets^ 
behaving  badly  to  their  parents. 

There  was  a  whole  street  of  shoemakers,  where  shoes  are 
made  for  the  dead ;  shops  with  dresses  for  the  dead. 

Shops  where  extraordinary  box-bellows  are  made;  and 
glass-blowers'  shops ;  furniture  manufactories ;  preparing 
tobacco  from  the  leaf  as  gathered  ;  embroidering  fans,  &c. 

Saw  several  Chinese  ladies,  one  of  them  the  daughter  of 
the  admiral  who  commanded  at  the  Bogue  forts  when 
attacked  by  Sir  M.  Seymour. 

Nursery  gardens  and  breeding  of  gold-fish.  Youngsters 
receiving  instructions  to  enable  them  to  distinguish  between 
bad  money  and  good.  Walked  round  the  city  walls. 
Temperature  50^  to  60^ 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Shunghta  GoTemment  worki — ^Bubbling  well  and  joss-bouee — Nagasaki,  pretty 
ooontry,  good  roads,  fine  camellias — Tbe  Decima — Tea-factoxy,  bow  green 
tfta  ia  made—Tbe  town — American  missionaries — Japanese,  a  small  race,  take 
aaailj  to  European  customs — Hiogo — Rice  and  silk — Wbeat-lands — Osaka, 
good  hotela,  ponies — Tycoon's  casUe — Pear  and  peacb  orcbards — ^Buddbist 
temple,  huge  stone  tortoise,  priests — Feast  of  tbe  Disciples — Cemeteries — 
Traae»— ^Fine  temple — Yokohama,  curio-shops — Teddo,  travelling  in  sedans, 
good  hotel,  Japanese  like  English  dinner — Dr  Willis's  hospital-— Temple  of 
Ald«k — I^trge  temple  of  Asaxa,  its  pleasure-grounds — Tycoon's  palace— 
O.  O.  temple — ^Tea-gardens — Nurseries-— Sbeba  temple— Houses  of  wood  and 
paper — Burial-place  of  the  forty -seven  Lonins,  assassins.of  ^the  Mikado — Hara 
Kin — Sbeba  temple,  burial-place  of  Tycoons — Social  Evil  Establishment,. 
rented  by  Qovemment — Palaces  of  Damios — Canals — Yokohama — Asbewarra 
— ^Temple  of  Daiboots,  the  largest  bronze  head  iti  the  world — Tea-houses — 
Holy  poniee  Fine  scenery — Rice-grounds — ^Trees  and  flowers — Salt — Elama- 
kara,  the  most  sacred  temple,  Buddha's  sword — Sudden  changes  of  weather — 
Residence  of  foreigners — Leave  for  Shanghae,  nearly  wrecked  at  night  on 
Eoeklaland. 

13tA. — Having  returned  to  Hong-Kong,  took  passage  for 
Shanghae  in  the  Sunday  P.  and  0.  boat ;  temperature  68%  ten 
degrees  warmer  than  Canton.  Showery  weather,  but  calm. 
It  has  been  blowing,  so  the  sea  is  anything  but  smooth. 

14thj  Sunday. — No  service.  Ran  from  Ninepin  Island, 
passing  it  at  3  p.m.  yesterday,  109  miles ;  land  in  sight  all 
the  time.  Passed  the  American  steamer  Japan  on  her  way 
to  Hong-Kong  from  San  Francisco,  four  days  overdue.  Up 
to  daylight  this  morning,  and  for  some  time  afterwards,  the 
lightning  has  been  so  continuous  that  one  might  almost  say 
a  single  flash  has  lasted  through  the  night,  accompanied 
by  constant  thunder ;  heavy  weather  over  the  land,  with  a 
bright  sky  overhead. 

16tA. — Yesterday's  run  was  230  miles,  notwithstand- 
ing a  fresh  north-easter,  and  some  sea  on.  Wet  and  cold 
weather.  Temperature  down  to  50^  Many  Chinese  junks 
aboat  fishing.  Passing  close  to  some  islands.  Ran  to-day 
219  miles.  As  we  are  not  due  at  Shanghae  until  the  20th, 
^e  are  afraid  the  pilots  may  not  be  looking   out  for  us. 

E 


66  SHANGHAE—  WELL  AND  JOSS-HOUSE. 

Numbers  of  ChiDese  junks  abont^  irith  their  small  boats 
out  examining  their  hooks ;  they  seem  to  fish  here  in  the 
same  way  the  French  do  on  the  banks  of  Newfonndland,  by 
means  of  a  great  number  of  hooks  attached  to  a  yeiy  long 
line,  which  they  cast  out  with  buoys  attached.  These  junks 
are  admirable  sea-boats,  rising  to  the  waves  without  taking 
in  a  drop  of  water,  whilst  we  were  occasionally  throwing  the 
spray  from  chock  forward  to  right  aft  on  the  quarterdeck. 
Temperature  50°.  The  Sunda  is  1760  tons,  with  engines  of 
300  horse-power,  and  a  very  comfortable  boat. 

lltk, — ^Took  a  pilot  at  midnight,  and  are  now  malnng  the 
best  of  our  way  ioto  Shanghae  with  flood-tide  in  our  fayour. 
We  have  been  running  since  daylight  with  fiyur  to  five 
fathoms  water.  8.30  A.M.,  found  the  lightships  thirty-eight 
miles  from  Shanghae ;  clear  weather  and  coldish.  Tempera- 
ture 50<*.  1  P.M.,  let  go  our  anchor  in  Shanghae,  four  days 
frx>m  Hong-Kong.     Put  up  at  the  Astor  House. 

18/^ — Breakfasted  with  Major  C,  R.K,  who  is  here  super- 
intending or  controlling  the  expenditure  of  consuls,  and 
on  the  erection  of  buildings — in  fact,  of  all  expenditure  on 
Government  works. 

The  Bund,  as  it  is  called  here,  along  the  water-side  (the 
space  between  the  houses  and  the  water)  is  a  noble  thorough- 
fare of  some  three  miles  long ;  it  is  unequalled  by  anything 
I  have  seen  elsewhere  in  the  East 

20^^. — The  bubbling  well  and  the  old  joss-house,  close 
together,  are  called  the  sights  in  Shanghae.  The  first  is  a 
well  distant  about  three  miles  from  the  hoteL  On  the 
surface  of  it,  the  mouth  is  some  five  or  six  feet  square,  and 
the  water  comes  up  to  within  about  ten  feet  of  the  top.  You 
see  a  few  weak  bubbles  coming  up,  probably  sulphuretted 
hydrogen  gas,  and  this  is  all !  The  joss-house,  almost  a  ruin, 
is  close  alongside  of  it.  It  is  half-filled  with  dilapidated 
wooden  and  gilded  gods. 

20rt. — Noon,  left  Shanghae  in  the  Casta  Rica  steamer  for 
Nagasaki,  and  have  had  a  fresh  breeze  frx>m  N.E.,  with  a 
rolling  swell  out  of  the  Tellow  Sea,  which  has  stopped  our 
way  at  least  a  knot  an  hour ;  we  have  consequently  only 
made  179  miles  up  to  noon. 

21^,  Sunday. — Shall  hardly  make  Nagasaki  before  4  p.m. 


NAGASAKI— GREEN  TEA.  67 

fo-morrow,  as  we  have  290  miles  to  go.  We  have  forty  to 
fifty  passengers,  very  few  of  whom  have  shown  up  either  at 
breakfast  or  tiffin. 

The  CMta  Rica  is  one  of  the  Pacific  Company's  boats,  a 
paddle-steamer  1750  tons,  and  can  carry  1200  tons  dead 
weight.  The  dining-room  and  a  good  many  cabins  are 
between  decks.  The  poopdeck  runs  from  aft  chock  forward, 
and  upon  that  there  is  a  saloon  and  some  nK>re  cabins,  and 
above  that  again  a  few  cabins  with  another  saloon ;  she  has 
a  walking  beam. 

22cZ. — ^Noon,  the  island  of  Gtotto  in  sight.  Strong  breeze 
right  ahead  and  much  sea  on ;  only  goiug  four  knots.  Tem- 
perature 68®. 

23dl — ^Anchored  at  midnight ;  the  port  of  Nagasaki,  though 
not  very  capacious,  is  quite  large  enough,  I  daresay,  for  any 
number  of  vessels  that  is  ever  likely  to  come  here.  It  is 
completely  landlocked  by  hills  varying  from  300  to  1000 
feet  in  height,  the  summits  of  many  of  them  forming  cones 
almost  invariably  decorated  with  a  crest  of  pines,  the  culti- 
vation reaching  well  upwards.  The  outline  is  most  varied, 
and  there  are  valleys  running  through  them  in  all  directions. 
The  Unit  ensemble  is  one  of  the  prettiest  things  I  have  ever 


The  town  is  on  the  right  hand  on  entering,  and  in  many 
places  has  crept  well  up  the  sides  of  the  hills.  The  roads  in 
the  vicinity  are  in  capital  order,  bordered  by  hedges  of  the 
Cryptcmeria  Japaniea  mixed  up  with  the  bamboo  and  palm. 
Some  of  the  bungalows  have  pretty  gardens  attached  to  them, 
in  which  I  saw  some  fine  camellias. 

I  visited  the  Decima,  a  little  artificial  island,  the  old 
Dutch  settlement,  which  for  two  hundred  years  was  the  only 
spot  of  ground  in  Japan  accessible  to  foreigners  for  trading 
purposes.  I  walked  round  it;  the  circumference  is  about 
800  yards.  I  also  visited  a  tea  establishment  of  Messrs 
Glover,  where  I  saw  six  hundred  pans  in  rows,  set  in  brick- 
work, each  with  a  small  charcoal  fire  under  it,  and  into  which 
the  tea  is  put  and  then  sprinkled  with  powdered  Prussian 
blue ;  and  it  is  thus  made  into  green  tea,  princip&lly  for  the 
American  market  There  is  a.  woman  at  each  pan,  who  with 
her  hand  keeps  moving  the  tea  about  until  the  whole  gets 


ii  'Ajjjfzzi-^iEn^uzz:^:^ 


Oil  ZihTX-.^i,  in.  'iizii:?*    ^Tjiis  I  m:w  lugamtL  ^diiil  neas  ^etj 

nit£!ri  T^zr^  rrsr^'  tiskls.   fizszuzs  ami  slin^  cnft. 
TriTriiiTrr-r  ?:.  If  s,  Lj^trj,  -T^^  Jiss.  imi  ax  fzxsxzifcr  of 

ITiit  frr!i±!3  IT?  2111:^.  zrrnd^  iJTun   zl  sxj  fTtfrfn^t*  town  I 


rsr'ic^ati— V«:V^r,  iffi    :£* 


5:r  HL'i'rr. 

iii  jlLii  iii'v:!   m  ilie   :hiLn  ift   :ize  ml«  cf  ^i2c«i.  sad  n 
irriior  ;^  a&T^  ceei  "i^r^tf  ZLLikS  if  in^sL  n  crsoziftied ;  we 


uf  zij^zL^  z*^*i;irg  iZ.  -if  x:r,:s:iS:  jicas&^ix^  sal  cure  or 
'>"M..^L:<£ii  tT  TATifT^e-T,  virise  ccas  ore  qk  ssz&»  of  ihii 
?ek  =1.  fTST  Ir^corc-  y.-  ^iroztSK  ica:  ku  occe  than 
:  &  it-Til^  'if  zzn  GiTSTTTTt^m,  h  s  iSi^  to  pterent 


Wf  ::.:i  i  i.^in're:  :z  rri-^-w^zchtl  z^osLaaKx  cq  board  at 
XiC'ijjii.  iz.'L  Tr:  An-frLriz.  nis&i.iiiiri^  wbb.  ilieir  niTes 
JZ.1  :lillrrr^  r»:cz.l :  :r  Xt-r  Y:iri.  Tiiizx  wisL  ragn  Japanese 


iiZLili    ^iT^Lziy^    T'l-:    i:Tt   r^zi-T^    r^zsesw   k^cg^g   abont 


I^ir  ^trtfJi-fs**.  ■  jlrlrx  tT  ;if  aamci  I  biTe  s«en,  aze  a 
sriill  riij^,  T-irj  *l:r;  ^~cc  v"^:!  r&ri^ris;.  v2Lk2i  raise  them 
iirn£ :  -  f::::r  :-:ie>  fr:ci  :i;e  rrrci. £ :  lii^ir  r^  K>e  is  konooied 
vhi  a  SrjjLTirc  iipirrr:^::*  ir  :ii:ir  >::cfrrg^  They  wear 
z::liz:^  c-  :lc£r  bictis.  I-ii  ii-f  Ciin-ss*^  liaey  f^eed,  I  am 
!<:*£»  iz.  iieir  cvr:  ^:c«*  ▼-.li  clrosik^;  bat  beie  on 
Kitri,  a  c«m-  cf  :iici.  wi:  :ct:tt  a  tabk  to  themselTeB, 
itKZii  r>  ukf  Tvry  rjL::::rLl>  ;v  k^ires  and  forks,  as  do 
t: ijf  ive^rr  Ci:r*K  *irrfcrt*»  wb>  aUo  s:t  down  to  dinner 


HIOGO— OSAKA,  69 

in  the  cabin  after  the  passengers  have  finished.  I  have  been 
three  days  in  Japan  and  seen  no  rain.  It  has  been  cloudy^ 
with  the  temperature  at  62""  in  the  shade  at  noon. 

25M. — Anchored  at  Hiogo^  and  very  soon  afterwards  the 
bnik  of  the  passengers,  of  whom  we  must  now  have  some 
fifty,  independent  of  Japanese,  went  ashore.  The  native 
town  of  Hiogo,  where  many  foreign  merchants  have  their 
temporary  homes,  occupies  a  flat  between  the  hills  and  the 
sea,  and  must  contain  a  considerable  population.  Some 
houses  have  been  already  erected  in  the  foreign  settlement, 
and  many  are  in  course  of  construction.  The  place  has  not 
been  long  open  to  foreign  commerce,  being  the  last  opened 
of  the  treaty  ports. 

The  city  of  Osaka  is  distant  some  seventeen  miles,  and  is 
barred  to  the  entrance  of  large  vessels  by  a  sandbar,  upon 
which  there  is  only  about  five  feet  water.  We  are  now  on 
our  way  up,  for  it  seems  we  have  to  take  in  there  a  thousand 
tons  of  rice  and  silk  for  Yokohama,  which  will  detain  us  at 
least  two  days,  and  perhaps  more,  for  at  present  the  weather 
is  wet  and  boisterous,  and  must  interfere  with  our  work. 

2WA. — We  lay  all  day  anchored  about  two  miles  oflf  the 
bar,  and  four  miles  from  Osaka;  the  river  is  navigable  only  for 
craft  drawing  not  over  four  or  five  feet  water.  It  rained  all 
day  and  was  boisterous,  so  that  no  cargo  was  sent  on  board, 
and  only  two  of  our  passengers  went  on  shore  with  the 
captain,  and  they  were  glad  to  return  on  board  again  in  the 
afternoon,  without  having  profited  by  the  undertaking,  the 
weather  being  so  bad  they  were  confined  to  the  hotel  all 
the  time  they  were  ashore. 

27M. — The  clerk  of  the  weather  was  more  accommodating, 
and  by  6  A.if.  some  hundreds  of  boats,  each  carrying  about 
two  and  a  half  tons  of  rice,  were  seen  making  their  way  to 
the  ship.  Four  of  us  passengers  soon  found  a  boat,  and 
after  half  an  hour's  sculling  (for  the  Japanese  here  propel 
their  boats  solely  by  sculling,  and  not  at  all  by  rowing),  we 
jumped  ashore  just  inside  the  bar  at  the  mouth  of  the  river, 
on  the  bank  on  the  right-hand  side  in  ascending.  An  hour's 
sharp  walk,  partially  through  ground  very  neatly  cultivated, 
growing  mainly  wheat  on  raised  ridges,  a  deep  furrow  some 
two  feet  in  width  between  the  rows,  and  plantations  of  beans, 


70  HOTEL-^EASTER  SUNDA  Y. 

both  growing  laxuriantly,  without  either  a  blank  or  a  weed 
to  be  seen ;  but  principally  through  a  double  continuous  row 
of  small  houses,  though  many  were  of  two  stories,  the  upper 
story  being  very  low;  but  this  to  Japanese  cannot  be  of 
great  inconyenience,  for,  really,  unless  when  in  motion,  they 
are  always  squatted  upon  their  heels.  There  was  great 
cleanliness  throughout;  men,  women,  and  children  (and  of 
the  latter  there  seemed  to  be  a  prodigious  number)  flocked 
to  the  front  to  look  at  the  foreigners,  of  whom  they  have  as 
yet  seen  but  very  few.  After  an  hour's  sharp  walk  by  the 
bank  of  the  river,  occasionally  away  from  it  to  avoid  the 
bends,  we  reached  the  customhouse,  and  then  the  foreign 
settlement,  where  we  found  a  good  hotel  kept  by  a  Japanese, 
furnished  in  a  mixed  style,  partly  Japanese,  but  mainly 
European.  Most  of  the  floors  were  covered  with  thick 
Japanese  straw  mat,  whilst  in  the  principal  dining-room  and 
in  the  drawing-room  Brussels  carpets  took  the  place  of  mats. 
There  was  no  want  of  tables,  chairs,  and  bedsteads,  all  of 
the  European  type,  throughout  the  establishment ;  and  in  the 
drawing-room  there  was  a  piano,  also  a  large  musical  box. 
The  walls  and  ceilibgs  were  all  papered,  the  bedsteads 
furnished  with  mosquito-curtains,  and  the  room  with  all 
other  requisites.  We  breakfasted  there  very  comfortably  off 
some  half-dozen  dishes  very  fairly  cooked,  waited  upon  by  a 
Japanese  woman  and  several  boys. 

I  had  got  thus  far  in  my  journal  when  the  bell  rung  for 
divine  service  in  the  upper  saloon  ;  for  this  is  Sunday,  and, 
as  I  found  when  the  psalms  were  given  out — Easter  Sunday. 
I  don't  believe  any  one  on  board  but  the  clergyman  remem- 
bered anything  at  all  about  it,  and  so  it  is  with  most  people 
when  they  have  been  long  travelling.  We  mustered  a  congre- 
gation  of  some  thirty  persons,  Europeans  and  Americans,  of 
all  shades  of  Christianity,  I  daresay, ^but  the  service  per- 
formed by  Mr  Thompson  was  that  of  the  Episcopal  Protestant 
Church. 

Well,  to  go  back  to  the  hotel  at  Osaka^  after  partaking  and 
paying  the  shot,  a  dollar  each,  besides  the  beer  which  was 
drunk  by  some  of  the  party,  we  sallied  forth  to  the  Japanese 
livery-stables,  for  we  were  bent  on  hiring  ponies  to  take  ob 
to  a  castle,  that  of  the  Tycoon,  four  miles  from  the  city,  and 


PONIES— TYCOON'S  CASTLE.  71 

a  celebrated  pagoda,  two  miles  distant  We  found  half-a- 
dozen  poniea  in  the  stable,  each  in  its  stall,  with  its  head 
where  its  tail  ought  to  be,  according  to  our  notion ;  and  a 
▼ery  good  thing,  too,  that  these  ponies  are  so  placed,  for 
thej  are  the  most  vicious  little  brutes  living.  You  are 
never  safe  passing  within  reach  of  their  heels.  The  livery- 
stable  keeper  had  a  monopoly  of  the  horse-letting  or  horse- 
hiring  buysiness  to  foreigners  in  Osaka,  and  it  being  so, 
we  thought  we  were  lightly  let  off  by  having  to  pay 
only  four  booSj  or  somewhat  more  than  a  dollar  for  each 
pony  for  the  whole  half-day;  a  betto  or  runner  to  go  with 
ns  was  thrown  into  the  bargain,  of  course,  without  farther 
charge. 

My  friends  all  made  choice  of  their  horses,  for  I  have  found 
by  experience  that  the  best-looking  horses  in  a  livery-stable 
are  often  the  most  uncomfortable  to  ride.  So  having  pro- 
cured a  permit  at  the  customhouse  to  see  the  inside  of  the 
castle,  and  an  officer  to  accompany  us,  we  were  soon  mounted, 
and  making  the  best  of  our  way  towards  the  castle. 

The  ponies  were  all  full  of  mettle,  not  one  of  them  requir- 
ing either  whip  or  spur.  I  soon  found  that  my  brute  required 
all  my  strength  to  keep  him  in,  for  I  had  nothing  but  a 
snaffle  to  operate  with  ;  so  leading  the  ruck  very  much  against 
my  willy  away  we  went  helter-skelter  through  one  of  the 
principal  streets,  which  led  us  in  a  straight  line  to  the  castle. 
Of  course  we  created  great  excitement  as  we  raced  along ; 
the  whole  population  of  the  neighbourhood  turning  out  to 
look  at  the  mad  foreigners.  As  the  street  was  narrow,  and 
moderately  thronged  with  people,  we  rode  in  Indian  file,  and 
miraculously  escaped  doing  any  damage  either  to  pedestrians 
or  to  ourselves,  notwithstanding  the  numerous  signboards 
every  here  and  there  projecting  well  into  the  street. 

In  twenty  minutes  we  found  ourselves  at  the  castle.  Here 
I  insisted  on  changing  my  snaffle  for  a  double  bit  from  the 
horse  ridden  by  our  attendant. 

This  castle  has  a  formidable  appearance,  and  may  occupy 
some  dO  acres.  The  enclosing  outside  walls  are  of  octagonal 
shape,  well  built  of  large  irregular-shaped  stones,  and  some 
50  feet  high ;  the  corner-stones  being  always  larger  and 
thicker  than  the  others.    I  measured  several  inside  the  prin- 


72  MIKADO'S  FORCES— TEMPLE. 

cipal  gateway,  and  found  the  largest  to  be  45  feet  long;  and 
we  guessed  the  width  to  be  25  feet ;  the  thickness  might 
have  been  3  feet ;  some  of  the  corner-stones  might  have  been 
7  to  8  feet  thick. 

The  entrance  is  by  a  bridge  over  a  broad  and  deep  moat 
filled  with  water,  and  a  dry  ditch  of  considerable  depth,  both 
of  which  encircle  the  castle  in  its  whole  extent.  The 
entrance  gates  seemed  to  be  very  well  made  and  strong, 
and  covered  with  iron ;  easily  knocked  to  pieces,  however,  by 
a  few  shots  from  a  four-and-twenty  pounder.  There  were 
bastions  at  the  corners,  and  in  the  centre  was  a  sort  of  raised 
enceinte,  from  the  top  of  which  we  had  an  extensive  view  of 
the  city  and  the  surrounding  plain,  thickly  studded  with  large 
villages  up  to  the  foot  of  the  hills.  The  city  lay  between  us 
and  the  great  Gulf  of  Osaka,  and  in  that  direction  must  have 
occupied  some  six  or  seven  ilniles ;  and  well  it  might,  for  it 
is  said  to  contain  half  a  million  of  inhabitants. 

A  few  months  ago,  in  the  late  revolution,  this  castle  was 
held  by  the  Tycoon,  who  evacuated  it  without  an  attempt  at 
defence  when  threatened  by  the  Mikado's  forces.  There  must 
have  been  many  buildings  in  it  at  that  time,  the  whole 
of  which  were  soon  afterwards  destroyed  by  fire.  The  only 
cannon  I  saw  were  two  brass  twenty-four  pounders ;  what  the 
state  of  its  armament  was  when  evacuated  by  the  Tycoon, 
I  could  not  learn. 

Leaving  the  castle,  not  without  a  feeling  of  admiration 
for  the  builders  of  such  a  truly  noble  fortress,  we  mounted, 
and  directed  our  course  towards  the  temple,  passing  in  our 
way  many  orchards  of  pears  and  peaches  now  in  full  bloom, 
and  through  outlying  streets  of  the  suburbs  of  the  city.  With 
ponies  of  such  mettle,  we  got  quickly  over  the  two  miles  that 
separated  the  temple  from  the  castle. 

This  pagoda,  or  temple,  consists  of  a  number  of  buildings 
of  the  stereotyped  character  of  Buddhist  temples,  but  as  far 
as  I  saw,  differing  from  the  Chinese  temples  in  not  contain- 
ing a  single  idol,  with  the  exception  of  a  sacred  stone  tortoise 
of  huge  dimensions,  placed  at  one  end  of  the  bottom  of  a  well 
some  twelve  feet  square  and  six  feet  deep,  forming  the  centre 
of  a  small  temple  which  we  found  thronged  with  worshippers 
(more  women  than   men)  employed  in  giving  drink  to  the 


VOTIVE  OFFERINGS^TEMPLE.  73 

tortoiBe,  wliicli  they  accomplished  by  means  of  a  Lillipntiaa 
spndgely  so  far  as  capacity  was  considered,  but  with  a  slight 
bamboo  handle  sufficiently  long  to  enable  them  to  reach  the 
water  at  the  bottom  of  the  well  as  they  stood  round  the  balus- 
trade that  surrounded  its  mouth. 

Numerous  votive  offerings,  in  the  shape  of  wooden  tallies 
witii  holy  sentences  written  upon  them,  supplied  to  the  faith- 
ftil  for  a  consideration  by  a  priest  in  attendance,  were 
thrown  into  the  well,  of  which  I  suppose  we  might  consider 
the  tortoise  the  lord  and  master.  It  was  a  Buddhist  feast- 
day,  the  Feast  of  the  Disciples,  whatever  that  might  mean, 
80  there  was  something  like  high  mass  being  performed  in 
one  of  the  larger  temples,  connected  by  a  bridge  fifty  feet 
long  over  a  pond  with  another  temple,  where  some  of  the 
performing  priests  were  mustered,  and  into  which  we  tried 
hard  to  obtain  admittance,  but  in  vain.  The  dress  of  many 
of  the  actors  looked  very  operatic,  and  the  whole  affair  was 
very  theatrical,  and  to  us  very  comic.  There  was  a  host  of 
people  gathered  together  in  these  temples,  but  the  foreigners, 
I  think,  attracted  the  attention  of  fully  one-half  of  them. 

Pressed  by  time,  for  the  day  was  advancing,  we  mounted 
our  ponies  and  moved  away  to  the  city,  passing  through  a 
long  well-kept  street  of  small  temples,  to  each  of  which  was 
attached  a  cemetery — the  whole,  temples,  cemeteries,  and 
streets,  so  far  as  I  could  see,  all  in  excellent  condition.  We 
tamed  into  one  of  the  principal  streets ;  it  was  very  clean, 
with  neatly-kept  shops  on  each  side,  filled  principally  with 
articles  manufactured  by  the  Japanese,  including  umbrellas, 
mats,  boxes,  straw  hats,  fans,  were  all  prominent  features — 
tidiness  and  cleanliness  everywhere ;  and  so  we  wended  our 
way  slowly  along,  stared  at  by  every  man,  woman,  and  child 
occupying  the  streets  we  passed  through,  but  everywhere 
treat^  with  great  deference.  We  arrived  at  last  opposite 
the  largest  and  principal  temple  of  the  city ;  here  we  dis- 
mounted and  went  in.  This  temple  is  very  handsome  ;  the 
Mikado  put  up  there  the  other  day  when  passing  through 
Osaka.  It  is  composed  of  two  very  large  halls,  not  high, 
and  several  smaller  ones.  In  one  hall  we  found  a  Buddhist 
priest  preaching  from  a  pulpit,  similar  to  our  own  pulpits, 
to  a  congregation  of  respectably-dressed  people,  numbering 


74  BOUND  FOR  YOKOHAMA— GALE. 

about  two  handred,  all  sitting  upon  their  heels  and  listening 
attentiyelj  to  the  preacher.  Neither  the  congregation  nor 
the  preacher  appeared  at  all  pnt  out  by  our  visit,  and  we 
remained  listening  for  some  ten  minutes.  To  all  appearance 
the  preacher  was  an  eloquent  man;  he  was  habited  more  or 
less  like  a  Roman  Catholic  priest,  and  the  whole  thingi 
preacher  and  congregation,  resembled  exactly  what  I  have 
witnessed  a  hundred  times*  in  Catholic  churches  in  Italy, 
where  the  women  usually  squatted  on  mats. 

We  saw  no  idol  in  this  temple ;  there  was  a  small  paint- 
ing of  the  Emperor  at  the  extremity  of  the  hall  in  which 
the  preaching  was  going  on,  and  nothing  more ;  and  the  hall 
would  contain,  I  suppose,  if  full,  a  congregation  of  two 
thousand  people.  We  lefb  this  temple  much  impressed  with 
what  we  had  seen  there,  mounted  our  ponies,  proceeding 
onwards.  Another  half-hour  brought  us  to  the  settlement^ 
where  we  delivered  up  our  ponies  to  their  owners. 

In  half  an  hour  more  myself  and  a  companion  were 
seated  in  a  boat  with  some  half-dozen  of  our  Japanese 
passengers,  whom  we  luckily  ran  against  just  as  they  were 
starting  for  our  steamer,  the  Costa  Biea;  she  had  just 
tripped  her  anchor  when  we  got  alongside,  and  in  five 
minutes  more  she  was  proceeding  at  full  speed  towards 
Hiogo,  having  finished  embarking  cargo  one  hour  before ;  so 
we  had  a  very  narrow  escape  of  being  left  behind.  It  was 
now  6  P.M.,  when  we  sat  down  to  dinner  with  a  very  good 
appetite,  getting  to  Hiogo  by  the  time  we  had  finished 
dinner,  14t^  miles,  remaining  at  anchor  until  6.30  A.1L  on 
the  28th,  when  we  got  under  weigh  for  Yokohama.  Wc 
had  a  strong  breeze  from  N.E.  when  we  left  Hiogo,  which 
increased  to  a  gale  during  the  night 

29M. — Gale  blowing  and  rough  sea  running,  with  thick, 
heavy  weather.  We  are  now  just  holding  our  own  with  her 
h^ad  to  the  sea,  and  in  this  way  we  are  tolerably  quiet.  Until 
the  weather  changes  we  can  make  no  progress.  We  are  very 
near  a  chain  of  islands  and  reefs  through  which  we  have  to 
pass.  The  glass  is  still  falling,  so  I  expect  worse  weather ; 
aneroid  29*90. 

The  glass  has  not  risen,  though  the  wind  had  veered  round 
from  N.E.  to  N.W.,  and  the  weather  suddenly  cleared  up, 


YOKOHAMA— THE  MOUSTACHE.  75 

when   the  mainland  was   in  sight,  abont   15  miles  off,  at 

7  P.M. 

30/^ — ^9  A.]Ly  anchored  and  landed  in  Yokohama.  Tem- 
perature 45**;  aneroid  30*50.     Wind  N.W.,  and  clear. 

31<^. — Some  fifty  vessels  in  port,  steamers  and  sailing 
craft ;  among  the  latter  the  Japan  and  China  loom  very 
large ;  the  former  takes  the  mail  to  San  Francisco  to-morrow ; 
she  has  1200  Chinamen  on  board. 

Last  night,  whilst  I  was  reading  in  my  room,  there  was 
the  knock  at^the  door,  and  a  man  made  his  appearance  in  a 
state  of  gpreat  excitement ;  he  held  a  candle  in  his  hand,  and 
said  (beginning  in  very  broken  English,  and  ending  up 
in  French)  that  he  had  come  to  look  after  a  small  white 
glass  bottle  (he  was  very  minute  in  the  description  he  gave 
of  it),  which  contained  something  he  was  in  the  habit  of 
dressing  his  moustache  with,  accompanying  his  words  by  the 
action  of  passing  his  fingers  over  his  moustache — ^which  said 
mooatache  was  a  very  insignificant  afTair — to  make  me  com- 
prehend to  the  full  how  grieyous  had  been  his  loss,  which 
he  had  left  yesterday  in  the  room  I  now  occupied.  I 
immediately  recognised  in  the  unfortunate  man  my  former 

fellow-passenger.  Count .    I  told  my  friend  I  had  not 

seen  his  bottle,  and  that  he  had  better  look  roand  and  see 
if  it  was  to  the  fore.  He  hunted  everywhere,  but  the  bottle 
was  not  forthcoming.  How  he  will  have  managed  his 
moostache  without  it,  I  cannot  tell. 

April  \9L — Strolled  among  the  curio-shops.  I  saw  most 
extraordinary  things  in  the  shape  of  toys.  Afterwards  to 
the  heights  upon  which  foreigners  are  erecting  bungalows. 
Visited  a  nurseryman's  establishment.  Left  Yokohama  in 
the  public  stage,  arriving  at  Yeddo  at  6  p.m.  A  consular 
passport  was  required  to  go  to  Yeddo,  which  costs  two 
dollars.  The  distance  is  nearly  twenty  miles,  and,  with  the 
exception  of  a  few  hundred  yards  of  the  road,  the  whole 
route  lies  through  a  street  and  over  a  very  good  road.  The 
main  street,  through  which  we  drove,  is  wide  compared  with 
those  of  Canton.  The  weather  was  wet,  and  we  met  scores 
of  people  travelling  in  sedan  chairs,  some  going,  others  com- 
iug  from  Yeddo. 

The  hotel  is  a  large,  really  fine  building.     It  has  been 


76  YEDDO— HOSPITAL. 

built  by  a  Japanese,  and  has  cost  him,  with  the  furniture,  some 
£16,000,  a  good  deal  of  money  for  a  wooden  house.  A  party 
of  Japanese  had  just  sat  down  to  dinner  as  we  arriyed; 
they  are  fond,  it  seems,  of  an  English  dinner,  and  do  not 
mind  paying  three  dollars  a  head  for  it,  besides  their  drink, 
provided  they  can  get  mutton,  which  is  very  scarce  and  dear 
in  Japan,  consequently  considered  a  great  delicacy  by  the 
Japanese.  I  saw  the  party  in  the  billiard-room  after 
dinner ;  they  were  all  merry,  and  one  of  them  rather  screwed. 
Temperature  64®. 

2d, — I  hired  an  open  carriage  and  pair,  and  proceeded  to 
see  the  sights.  The  mate  of  an  American  whaler  had  already 
started  in  a  pony-chaise  with  the  same  object  He  did  not 
at  all  know,  he  said,  where  he  was  going,  but  had  made  up 
his  mind  to  let  go  his  kedge  whenever  he  got  tired.  We 
drove  first  to  Dr  Willis's  hospital,  four  miles  off,  and  found 
the  doctor  operating  upon  a  boy  for  harelip.  We  were  in 
hopes  of  getting  the  doctor  to  come  out  with  us,  but  he  was 
too  much  occupied ;  he  gave  us  a  guide,  however,  and  with 
him  we  visited,  first,  the  temple  and  residence  (it  had  been) 
of  Aidsa,  a  partisan  of  the  Tycoon,  and  the  last  place  in 
Yeddo  where  any  stand  was  made  against  the  Mikada 
Some  three  thousand  men  defended  this  place,  but  were 
driven  out  ultimately  after  some  hard  fighting,  and  the 
temple  and  other  buildiugs  within  the  walls  were  all  burnt 
The  place  is  a  waste  now,  open  to  all  the  world  ;  before  this 
event,  few  except  those  high  in  authority  were  ever  admitted 
within  its  precincts.  There  are  some  good-sized  trees  in  it, 
and  many  of  them. 

We  drove  to  the  temple  of  Asaxa.  This  is  a  large  and 
highly-decorated  temple,  kept  in  excellent  order.  It  was 
thronged  with  people  going  and  coming,  paying  their  devo- 
tions at  the  shrine  of  Buddha,  burning  incense,  and  casting 
their  mite  into  an  enormous  receptacle  for  the  offerings  of 
the  pious,  consisting  of  a  chest  twelve  feet  long  and  about 
half  that  in  breadth,  placed  in  front  of  the*  altar,  the  top 
with  bars  railed  across,  with  a  wide  opening  between  them. 
The  grounds  around  the  temple  are  very  extensive,  and 
occupied  with  a  sort  of  booth,  with  penny  shows  and  shops 
Belling  toys,  sweetmeats,  and  a  thousand  other  things ;  there 


TEMPLES^PALACES,  77 

are  also  some  small  nurserj-gardeiiB  and  pleasure-grounds 
frequented  by  the  holiday  people  of  Yeddo.  The  whole 
place  mnst  contain  several  hundred  acres.  I  purchased  a 
touchstone  ball  in  a  curio-shop  attached  to  a  tea-house,  for 
which  I  gave  seven  boos,  about  eight  shillings  and  sixpence. 
From  this  temple  we  returned  to  the  hotel  to  lunch,  and 
afterwards  drove  to  the  Tycoon's  palace,  a  walled  place,  with 
high  ramparts  round  three  sides  of  it  covered  with  trees, 
principally  pine,  and  enclosed  by  three  moats,  the  outer  one 
perhaps  a  hundred  yards  wide,  full  of  water  covered  with 
wildfowl — ducks,  of  which  there  must  be  many  thousands ; 
they  are  never  shot.    Temperature  in  room  43\ 

3dl — This  morning  drove  to  the  0.  G.  temple,  some  seven 
miles  off,  and  quite  outside  of  the  city.  The  temple  had  nothing 
remarkable  about  it,  very  small,  but  kept  in  good  order. 
The  village  in  which  it  is  situated,  and  the  country  round 
about  it,  are  very  pretty.  We  passed  through  a  great  deal  of 
wheat  and  barley  all  dibbled  (apparently)  on  ridges,  and 
very  thick  in  the  rows  ;  not  a  weed  was  to  be  seen  anywhere. 
All  the  cultivation  is  spade-labour. 

We  passed  one  large  tea-garden,  many  nurseries  and 
kitchen-gardens.  Saw  some  tall,  handsome  trees,  among 
them  many  Crjptomeria ;  there  was  one  cut  down  that 
measured  four  feet  in  diameter.  We  drove  round  the  Sheba 
temple.  On  the  return  to  the  hotel  we  ascended  a  hill  by 
some  eighty-four  stone  steps,  and  from  the  top  had  a  very 
good  look  over  the  city.  It  does  not  seem  as  if  it  contained 
a  million  of  inhabitants,  which  they  say  it  does.  The 
Damios'  palaces  occupy  a  considerable  deal  of  space,  but 
they  are  quite  empty  just  now.  Almost  every  house  has  a 
garden,  and  more  than  one-half  of  them  are  ground-floors 
only ;  they  are,  the  most  of  them,  very  poor  little  things, 
entirely  of  wood,  mere  sheds,  the  partitions  being  thin  slid- 
ing frames  of  wood,  with  paper  pasted  over  them. 

The  main  or  principal  street  is  perhaps  sixty  feet  wide,  and 
even  this,  as  you  look  down  a  long  range  of  it,  hardly 
appears  better  than  a  donble  row  of  booths  at  a  fair  at 
home. 

After  tiffin  we  drove  to  the  temple  and  burial-place  of 
the  forty-seven  Lonins,  who  sacrificed  themselves  some  160 


78      THE  FORTY'SEVEN  LONINS^HARA 

years  ago  to  areDge  an  insnlt  offered  to  their  lord  and 
master.  The  Btorr  is  this :  A  Damio  had  reoeired  an  insnlt 
from  some  man  in  power,  the  Mikado  perhaps,  iHiich  he 
attempted  to  areoge  on  the  spot,  but  he  was  cut  down,  and 
nltimaxelv  had  to  perform  the  Hara  Kiri  on  himseLC  As  a 
legmcT  to  his  retainers,  he  left  to  them  an  injunction  that  his 
death  shonld  be  arenged.  FortT-^seren  of  them  banded 
together  to  carrr  cm  the  desire  of  their  lord.  Thejr  came 
to  Yeddo,  and  employed  themselres  in  varions  oocopations 
nntil  an  c>j^rtunity  shonld  offer  to  canr  ont  their  design. 
They  obtained  a  plan  of  the  palace  of  the  Mikado,  and  at  length 
determined  npon  making  the  attack.  With  OMisiderable  diffi- 
culty they  forced  their  way  at  night  to  the  apartment  of 
their  yictim,  killed  him,  cnt  off  his  head,  which  thej  carried 
away,  and  deposited  it  in  the  tomb  of  their  master,  and  then 
they  retired  to  the  temple  we  visited  this  morning  to  await 
their  sentence.  They  were  permitted  to  perform  the  Hara 
Kiri,  which  saved  their  honour,  and  their  bodies  lie  in  the 
cemetery  of  the  temple,  where  their  tombs  are  frequently 
visited  even  now  bv  Japanese,  bv  whom  thev  are  looked 
upon  as  brave  men  and  martyrs.     Temperature  43\ 

4M. — ^Managed  to  get  admission  to  the  intericH*  of  Sheba, 
the  temples  which  hold  the  dust  of  the  departed  Tjrooons. 
They  are  highly-ornamented  places,  and  some  of  the  wood 
carvings  and  bronzes  a2>e  very  fine.  There  is  a  railing 
covered  with  peacocks  and  mandarin  ducks  in  wood-carving, 
and  of  stalks  standing  on  tortoises  supporting  lanterns  in 
bronze  jest  in  fnc^nt  of  the  alrar.  the  workmanship  of  which 
was  particG^.arly  chaste.  Then  there  was  the  holy  of  holies, 
into  which  we  were  admitted,  but  without  our  shoes :  here 
was  contained  a  number  of  lackered  Kvxes  placed  upon  stools, 
each  with  the  cover  tied  on  with  silk,  acd  with  the  name  (I 
suppotse  it  to  be")  of  the  individual  whotse  ashes  it  contains, 
or  a:  any  rate  in  whose  honour  it  is  placed  there.  We  could 
not«  however,  make  out  whether  the  ashes  of  the  Tvcoons 
were  buried  in  a  vault  under  the  door  of  the  holy  of  holies, 
tx  whether  they  were  cvrntained  in  the  lackered  boxes.  The 
eildinsr.  carrini:.  and  silk  drarerr  in  this  holv  of  holies  were 
verv  corseous, 

T:m  grc'unds  around  these  temples  are  extensive,  well  laid 


SOCIAL  EVIL^CURIO^HOPS.  79 

oat,  kept  scrupulously  neat,  and  contaiu  many  fine  trees, 
and  numerous  dwellings  for  the  priests  attached  to  the 
temples;  altogether  we  only  saw  some  half-dozen  images  of 
Buddha  and  his  wives  ;  and  so  it  is  generally  here  that 
there  are  but  few  idols  in  the  temples,  whilst  in  the  Chinese 
Buddhist  temples  they  are  usually  very  numerous. 

The  priests  who  showed  us  over  the  temples  were  civil,  and 
refbsed  to  take  a  fee  for  their  trouble,  thoagh  we  really 
pressed  it  upon  them.  We  had  an  escort  with  us  of  two- 
fiworded  men,  but  they  did  not  enter  with  us  into  the  secret 
places  of  the  temples. 

There  is  an  establishment  of  the  Government's,  the  Social 
Evil  Institution ;  the  girls  (we  saw  five  of  them)  were  in  a 
room  in  which  they  could  be  seen  and  talked  to  through  the 
wooden  bars  from  the  street ;  the  floor  of  the  room  was 
raised,  and  they  sat  to  be  admired,  or  came  to  the  bars  and 
conversed  with  their  friends  outside.  The  master  of  the 
place  was  in  the  doorway. 

5^ — ^^Ve  had  fine  weather  until  to-day ;  it  is  now  wet,  so 
we  shall  see  little  more  of  the  city,  as  we  (Mr  M'A.  and 
myself)  go  back  to  Yokohama  to-morrow. 

We  strolled  about  for  several  hours,  and  unless  when  we 
▼ent  into  a  shop  to  look  at  curios,  when  a  crowd  of  idlers 
always  gathered  about  us,  we  met  with  little  obstruction  in 
the  streets. 

I  cannot  say  much  for  the  architecture  of  the  houses  in 
the  city  ;  with  the  exception  of  the  enclosures  which  shut  in 
the  dwellings  of  the  Damios  and  the  temples,  the  city  looks 
little  better  than  a  mass  of  booths,  even  in  the  principal 
streets.  It  is  said  the  whole  city,  with  the  exception  of 
the  small  fireproof  mud  godowns,  which  are  pretty  thickly 
dotted  about,  and  must  amount  to  many  thousands,  is 
destroyed  once  in  every  seven  years.  The  houses  are  with- 
out exception  built  of  wood,  and  the  partitions  are  mere 
sliding  framed. panels  papered  over  ;  the  whole  affair  is  the 
most  flimsy  thing  possible. 

They  say  the  city  contains  a  million  inhabitants ;  it  may 
be  so,  for  I  have  never  seen  so  many  children  about  any- 
where.    The  Japanese  must  be  a  most  prolific  race,  every 


8o  DESCRIPTION  OF  YEDDO-^THE  ASHEWARRA. 

woman  yon  meet  with  has  a  child  strapped  to  her  back,  and 
so  has  every  biggish  girl,  and  their  name  is  legion. 

The  city  covers  a  large  area,  bat  a  great  deal  of  it  is  oc- 
cupied by  the  palaces  (if  they  may  be  so  called)  of  the  Da- 
mios,  the  sacred  enclosures  of  temples,  &c.,  and  by  canals, 
which  intersect  the  city  in  all  directions.  On  the  whole,  I 
confess  myself  disappointed  with  Yeddo.  The  main  street 
may  be  50  feet  wide,  and  a  short  street  leading  up  to  the 
temples  which  enclose  the  dust  of  the  defunct  Tycoons 
may  be  100  feet  wide ;  but  all  the  others  are  not  over  25  feet 
wide,  and  unless  in  the  market-places,  are  never  particularly 
thronged.  The  only  wheeled  vehicles  in  them  are  those 
driven  by  foreigners,  hired  for  sight-seeing.  The  custom- 
house is  a  respectable  establishment,  and  a  piece  of  ground 
close  to  it  has  been  allotted  to  foreigners  to  build  upon. 
Temperature  56^ 

^th. — 8  A.M.,  temperature  58**;  aneroid  falling  during  the 
night  from  30-4  to  29-90.     Wet,  with  light  northerly  wind. 

Went  down  to  Yokohama  in  four  hours,  stopping  to  change 
horses  at  the  half-way  house,  where  there  is  a  tea-shop  of 
considerable  importance,  largely  patronised  by  foreigners. 
Last  evening  it  blew  half  a  gale  from  the  north ;  it  subsided 
at  midnight 

ItK — Fine  weather.    Temperature  62** ;  aneroid  30*5. 

8^^. — The  Askervarra. — The  houses  composing  this  locality 
are  all  of  two  stories,  but  very  low,  the  rooms  not 
being  more  than  seven  feet  in  height.  They  are  all  of  wood, 
the  fronts  towards  the  street  being  without  exception 
formed  of  upright  wooden  bars  three  to  four  inches  apart, 
through  which  the  girls,  of  which  there  may  be  some 
two  thousand  in  the  establishment  (covering  some  twenty 
acres  of  ground),  may  be  seen  sitting  upon  a  raised  dais  in 
rows,  from  fifteen  to  twenty  in  a  room.  At  night  these  rooms 
are  gaily  lighted  up,  and  the  girls,  of  course,  with  their  best 
toggery  on.  We  saw  but  one  room  full,  in  their  gay  attire, 
and  they  were  squatted  in  a  row,  each  with  a  brazier  before 
her.  Everywhere  else  (as  it  was  only  a  little  after  midday 
when  we  paid  our  visit)  we  found  them  performing  their 
toilet ;  and  in  a  bath,  or  rather  in  a  room  with  a  boarded 
floor  and  a  good  supply  of  water  at  hand,  we  saw  from  the 


CANASA  WA—DAIBOOTS.  8i 

street  fiye-and-twentj  of  them  hard  at  work  Bcruhhing  them- 
eelves.  They  sat  and  laid  upon  the  floor  in  all  sorts  of  post- 
ures, and  were  not  in  the  slightest  degree  pnt  out  by  the 
public  looking  in  upon  them. 

The  whole  establishment,  I  was  told,  is  farmed  by  one 
man  from  the  (Jovemment.  The  girls  are  bought  from  their 
parents  for  five  or  seven  years,  and  some  of  them  at  a  very 
early  age ;  the  very  pretty  ones  being  taught  all  sorts  of 
accomplishments.  When  the  time  for  which  they  have  been 
porchased,  or  rather  leased,  from  their  parents  is  up,  they 
retom  to  society  without  being  thought  anything  the  worse 
for  their  sojourn  in  the  Ashewarra. 

ith. — On  going  to  my  room  last  night,  I  found  my  bed 
occopied.  The  captain  of  an  American  whaler,  who  had  been 
detained  on  shore  by  bad  weather,  had  been  put  into  it  by 
mistake! 

10^ — Journey  from  Yokohama  to  Canasawa  and  Daiboots, 
the  first,  a  village  distant  twelve  miles,  on  the  coast ;  and 
the  second,  a  temple  and  a  figure  (of  Buddha,  I  suppose) 
composed  of  sheets  of  copper  about  four  feet  wide,  nailed 
together.  This  enormous  figure  has  a  very  imposing  appear- 
ance as  you  approach,  advancing  up  the  straight  avenue  that 
leads  to  it  It  is  about  fifty  feet  in  height,  squatted  on  its 
haunches,  with  its  hands  clasped  in  front.  The  circumfer- 
ence of  it  is  over  150  feet,  and  the  diameter  of  this  immense 
figure  inside,  being  of  an  irregular  shape,  is  eight  yards  one 
way  and  ten  yards  another.  It  is  the  most  colossal  human 
bronze  or  copper  figure  I  have  ever  seen,  and  probably  it  is 
the  largest  in  the  world. 

The  base  of  the  solid  rock  wall  upon  which  it  rests  is 
about  five  feet  above  the  ground.  The  temple  attached  to 
it  is  very  small  and  insignificant,  and  is  served  by  a  very 
jolly  priest. 

We  were  two  hours  riding  to  Canasawa,  where  we  took  up 
our  abode  at  a  comfortable  tea-house ;  and  after  enjoying  our 
tiffin  (sent  on  by  coolies)  we  went  to  Daiboots.  On  return- 
ing, we  stopped  at  Canasawa,  where  there  are  some  temples 
of  no  importance,  and  two  white  ponies,  holy  ponies,  which 
are  kept  at  the  entrance  of  the  temple  grounds. 

The  whole  road,  after  getting  out  of  Yokohama,  is  through 


8a  MANUFACTURE  OF  SALT. 

cultivated  valleys  and  among  well-wooded  hills,  presenting 
a  constant  succession  of  ever-varying  and  really  beaatiflil 
landscape  scenery.  Wheat  and  barley  were  the  crops  that 
met  the  eye  in  the  valleys,  and  frequently  on  the  terraced  sides 
of  the  hills,  sown  in  drills,  looking  very  strong  and  healthy. 
Beans  also  to  some  extent,  just  in  bloom,  loading  the  air 
with  delicious  perfume,  and  growing  luxuriantly.  The  paddj- 
ground  was  everywhere  covered  with  water,  the  season  for 
sowing  or  planting  paddy  not  having  yet  arrived. 

The  trees  most  common,  lining  the  road  and  covering 
the  hills,  are  the  Cryptomeria,  and  a  fir  resembling  the  com- 
mon Scotch  fir :  there  were  many  others,  the  beech,  the  maple, 
and  a  number  peculiar  to  Japan,  but  the  Cryptomeria  is  the 
most  common  of  all,  and  is  planted,  cut,  and  trained  to  form 
hedges ;  it  forms  avenues,  and  there  are  endless  plantations 
of  it  everywhere.  I  have  not  met  with  it  of  greater  girth  a 
few  feet  from  the  ground  than  fifteen  feet,  but  it  grows  much 
larger  in  the  interior,  even  measuring  sometimes  forty  feet 
in  girth.  Many  of  our  wild-flowers  are  here,  the  dqg-violet 
among  them  blooming  in  profusion,  but  the  sweet-violet  I 
have  not  seen. 

A  considerable  number  of  persons  in  this  village  of  Cana- 
sawa  are  employed  in  manufacturing  salt  The  operation 
is  conducted  on  several  pieces  of  perfectly  flat  land,  dose 
down  upon  the  sea-shore,  containing  each  more  or  less  some 
ten  acres.  The  flat  pieces  of  land  must,  I  should  suppose, 
be  occasionally  flooded,  although  I  could  not  learn  that  such 
was  really  the  case ;  at  any  rate  the  surface-soil,  sand,  is 
strongly  impregnated  with  salt.  The  workmen  rake  up  this 
surface-soil,  put  it  into  bushel  baskets,  placed  each  upon  a 
tub.  The  entire  surface  of  the  ground  more  or  less  is  dotted 
over  with  these  tubs,  each  with  a  basket  of  surfiace-soil 
placed  upon  it.  Water  is  poured  upon  these  baskets  of 
earth,  which  percolates  through  it  to  the  tub  underneath, 
carrying  with  it  all  the  salt  contained  in  the  earth.  In  this- 
way  a  very  strong  solution  of  salt  is  got,  which  is  carried 
to  a  house  hard  by,  and  there  by  means  of  a  moderate  heat 
the  water  is  evaporated  and  the  salt  collected. 

Wth. — Weather  cloudy  but  dry;  we  mounted  our  ponies 
(which  seem  never  to  tire),  and  proceeded  to  Eamakura^  a 


KAMAKURA--B UDDHA 'S  SWORD.  83 

Tillage  four  miles  from  Canasawa,  where  there  is  a  temple 
oonsidered  by  the  Japanese  one  of  the  most  sacred  of  the 
thousand  and  one  temples  scattered  broadcast  over  this  land. 
Mr  G.,  80  soon  as  we  arrived  there,  pitched  his  photographic 
apparatus,  and  before  commencing  operations  we  took  a  cur- 
sorj  view  of  the  inside  and  contents  of  the  principal  temple. 
It  stands  on  high  ground,  and  is  reached  by  a  flight,  I  may 
say  an  imposing  flight,  of  granite  steps — ^fifty-one,  I  think. 
We  paid  a  boo,  about  a  shilling,  on  entering  the  temple,  and 
then  we  were  permitted  to  walk  round  it,  the  priests  uncover- 
ing, as  we  proceeded,  the  contents  of  their  little  chapels,  oc- 
cupying three  sides  of  a  square.  One  huge  old  sword  seen>ed 
to  be  the  lion  of  the  collection,  said  to  have  belonged  to 
Buddha,  and  of  course  many  thousands  of  years  old.  There 
were  several  other  smaller  swords,  some  spears,  chain  armour, 
bows  and  arrows,  ^,  and  we  ended  up  at  the  last  chapel  by 
having  presented  to  us  a  cup  of  saki — rice  spirit. 

In  a  sacred  enclosure  in  front  of  the  temple  (we  were  only 
permitted  to  look  into  it  through  the  bars)  were  exposed  two 
large  bows  with  corresponding  arrows  of  bamboo  highly 
ornamented.  The  meaniftg  of  all  this  to  us  remained  a 
secret,  and  there  must  be  a  much  more  extended  intercourse 
with  the  Japanese  by  persons  learned  in  the  language 
before  the  history  of  such  temples  as  this  and  their  contents 
can  be  unravelled.  The  temple  is,  like  all  others,  built  with 
an  overhanging  roof,  with  a  good  deal  of  gilding  and  carving 
about  it.  The  compound  or  enclosure  contains  altogether 
five  temples  more  or  less  of  the  same  character. 

lliere  was  no  obstacle  thrown  in  the  way  of  Mr  O.  tak- 
ing photographs,  which  he  accomplished  pretty  successfully, 
and  associated  with  Japanese  worshippers,  I  was  made 
to  cut  a  prominent  figure.  The  pilgrims  coming  to  pray 
and  pay,  which  always  go  together,  I  observed,  were  quite 
pleased  to  be  photographed,  and  they  always  wanted  to  look 
at  their  figures  in  tiie  negative,  at  which  they  laughed 
heartily. 

As  soon  as  we  had  finished  at  Kamakura,  we  packed  up 
and  rode  on  to  Daiboots,  about  a  mile  and  a  half  distant. 
Of  the  colossal  figure  here  Mr  G.  took  two  good  photographs. 
Whilst  this  operation  was  going  on,  I  sat  down  at  the  receipt 


24  PAY  AXD  PRAY— DINNER. 

of  cimcm  alongside  the  priest,  the  only  one  in  charge 
at  this  temple,  and  azniLsed  mjself  watching  the  devotees 
who  came  to  praj  and  pay  at  the  shrine  of  Daiboots. 
Toer  seldom  remained  more  than  a  quarter  of  an  honr, 
nnless  when  ther  were  wanted  to  figure  in  a  photograph, 
and  to  do  so  they  were  always  willing.  On  arrival,  the  first 
operation  was  to  throw  two  or  three  cook  into  the  capacioos 
receiving  box  which  stood  in  firont  of  the  monster  Dai* 
boots,  then  a  short  prayer  was  said,  and  then  the  pilgrim 
walked  round  to  where  the  priest  was  seated,  and  to  whom 
he  gave  a  somewhat  larger  amount  of  eatk^  which  was 
deposited  in  another  receiving  box.  He  then  walked  into 
the  interior  of  the  statue,  said  a  few  short  prayers  there — 
addressed  to  some  small  figures  of  inferior  gods,  I  suppose — 
came  out,  making  a  further  payment  of  cfuk  to  the  presiding 
priest,  which  also  went  into  the  receiving  box,  which  ended 
the  business.  Sometimes  the  party  of  worshippers  consisted 
of  three  or  four  old  women,  and  again  a  father  and  mother 
with  a  family  of  young  children  strapped  to  their  backs,  or 
some  young  fellows  from  a  distant  part  of  the  country.  In 
fact,  the  groups  that  marched  t(|)  to  old  Daiboots,  who 
looked  down  upon  them  all,  rich  and  poor,  with  the  same 
grave  countenance,  were  ever  varying.  They  were  always  well 
behaved,  and  easily  made  to  laugh.  One  would  take  them 
to  be  a  very  simple  people. 

On  my  arrival  at  the  temple,  though  not  a  worshipper,  I 
gave  the  priest  a  boo,  about  one  shilling  and  threepence; 
this  set  him  to  work  at  once  to  prepare  tea  for  us,  and 
ensured  his  cheerful  services  for  anything  we  required  of 
him  besides.  I  did  not  observe  that  he  put  the  piece  of 
silver  into  the  receiving  box;  he  was  aficaid  it  might  be 
defiled  by  the  copper  coin. 

It  was  seven  o^clock  before  we  got  back  to  the  tea-house 
at  Canasawa.  Our  host  soon  prepared  our  dinner;  fish, 
fried  slices  of  mutton,  and  ham  and  eggs,  which  we  washed 
down  with  a  bottle  of  moselle.  With  the  help  of  a  brazier 
we  kept  ourselves  warm  in  the  paper  house,  and  at  11  p.ml 
turned  into  our  beds  on  the  matting  floor,  Japanese  fashion, 
and  slept  soundly. 

\ZtJu — On  awaking  in  the  morning  we  found  wet  weatheri 


SUJ>DEN  CHANGES  OF  WEATHER.  85 

and  a  falling  aneroid  warned  us  that  it  would  be  worse 
before  it  got  better,  so  we  determined  to  pack  up  and  return 
to  Yokohama.  Three  coolies  took  charge  of  our  bedding  and 
other  luggage  wrapped  up  in  water-proof  cloth.  They  of 
course  were  on  foot,  still,  though  they  had  not  started  when 
we  left  the  tea-house,  they  arrived  at  Yokohama  half  an 
hour  after  we  did,  say  in  about  four  hours,  over  a  very 
heavy  road,  raining  hard  the  whole  of  the  time,  a  distance  of 
12  miles.  The  weather  got  worse  as  we  neared  home.  All 
the  previous  night  it  had  raided  and  blown  a  gale,  so  this 
morning  we  congratulated  ourselves  in  not  having  delayed 
our  return,  for  now,  dry  overhead,  the  roads  must  have  been 
in  a  desperately  bad  state.  Yesterday,  in  crossing  a  hill  in 
the  way,  we  found  the  road  so  slippery  that  we  had  to  dis- 
mount and  walk  for  a  whole  hour  through  thick  soapy 
mud. 

Ibth. — Weather.  The  changes  are  very  sudden;  after 
blowing  a  gale  from  north  the  night  before  last,  the  morn- 
ing was  very  fine,  and  the  aneroid  had  risen  -^hs.  It  con- 
tinued fine  until  5  p.m.,  when  the  sky  blackened  again  in 
the  north,  and  in  half  an  hour  we  had  a  smart  gale  blowing 
again  from  the  north,  which  sent  the  Japanese  boats  seeking 
shelter  up  the  creeks,  and  made  it  impossible  for  ships' 
boats  in  many  instances  to  get  on  board.  There  is  a  great 
kick-up  on  the  bund  at  Yokohama,  with  a  strong  northerly 
wind,  which  puts  an  end  to  all  discharging  or  loading  cargo. 
Tbis  breeze  was  accompanied  by  a  little  rain,  and  had 
entirely  calmed  down  by  10  p.m. 

This  morning  the  weather  was  again  bright  and  cheery, 
with  a  light  breeze  from  N.W. ;  the  aneroid  had  risen  ^ths 
and  the  temperature  52''.  During  the  fortnight  I  have  been 
here  I  have  experienced  the  same  sudden  changes  of  weather 
just  detailed;  the  aneroid  constantly  fluctuating  between 
29-90  and  30-50,  the  temperature  between  48"*  and  62^ 

Walked  on  the  bluff,  now  being  fast  covered  by  foreign 
bungalows,  and  in  many  instances  by  very  pretty  gardens. 
The  bluff  commands  fine  views  seawards  and  landwards, 
and  may  be  300  to  400  feet  above  the  flat  upon  which 
Yokohama  stands.  The  drawback  to  most  parts  of  it  as  a 
place  of  residence  is  the  exposure  to  all  the  strength  of  the 


«r  BOUND  FOR  &HANGHAE. 

hi^h  winds  so  commoD  on  the  coast  of  Japan,  otherwise  the 
situation  is  delightful. 

16M. — Left  Yokohama  in  the  P.  and  0.  steamer  Namoj 
068  tons,  238  horse-power  engines.  It  was  almost  calm  as 
wo  steamed  out  of  the  Bay  of  Yeddo,  but  the  aneroid  had 
fallen  somewhat  during  the  morning.  By  8  p.ml  there  was 
a  stiff  breeze  from  S.W.,  and  a  nasty  cross-running  sea, 
accompanied  by  very  thick  weather.  Hie  current  all  along 
the  coast  sets  constantly  to  the  northward,  and  even  in 
ordinary  weather  at  the  rate  of  four  miles  an  hour.  It  was 
clear,  then,  that  with  the  strong  northerly  breezes  that  had 
been  blowing  for  some  days  previously,  now  that  the  wind 
had  shifted  to  the  S.W.,  the  ordinary  current  along  the 
coasts  would  naturally  be  increased.  This  had  occurred  to 
luo,  and  I  was  still  turning  it  over  in  my  mind  as  I  lay  in 
luy  Wrth  when  eight  bells  struck.  It  was  midnight  of  the 
U>tlu  The  sea  had  increased  to  such  an  extent  that  the 
Uttio  Sornn  was  knocked  about  by  it  as  if  she  had  been  a 
nioro  cork  on  its  surface.  Our  position  with  regard  to  the 
iuuuoi\>us  islands  that  were  in  our  track  was  occupying  my 
thoughts  wliou  the  cry  on  deck  of  "Hard  a  starboard  1" 
tliriiH*  liurriiHlly  repeated,  accompanied  by  a  stoppage  of  the 
ou>iiiioi*,  instantly  followed  by  a  reversal  of  the  engines  and 
l\(ll  Hpooil  astorn,  made  me  jump  out  of  bed.  I  waited  for 
noiuothing  more  before  rushing  on  deck,  but  all  remained 
k\\\\kA^  ho  I  turned  in  again  and  after  awhile  went  to  sleep, 
iM^liovihg  that  what  had  just  taken  place  was  owing  to  a  near 
oollisiou  with  some  Japanese  junk,  which  in  no  case  could 
liHve  done  us  any  harm.  It  turned  out,  however,  to  have 
been  a  more  serious  matter.  The  night  was  dark  and  the 
weather  very  thick,  when  suddenly  the  mist  in  which  the 
ship  was  enveloped  cleared  away,  and  showed  to  the  officer 
on  the  bridge  Bock  Island  close  under  the  bows;  two 
minutes  more  and  we  should  have  been  upon  it,  and  with  the 
sea  running  at  the  time,  five  minutes  would  have  Bofficed  to 
have  sent  the  Noma  with  all  on  board  into  the  other  world. 
I  think  it  was  as  narrow  a  squeak  as  I  ever  had  of  shipwreck, 
without  really  coming  to  grief.  I  knew  nothing  of  the  danger 
we  had  so  narrowly  escaped  until  the  morning,  when  on  going 
on  deck  the  captain  told  me  what  had  happened. 


NEARLY  WXECKED.  87 

Vitk. — ^From  twelve  o'clock  last  night  until  half-past  five 
this  morning  we  were  going  quarter  speed  (five  knots) , 
and  at  six  made  the  land  in  the  vicinity  of  Van  Diemen's 
Straits.  We  had  no  sights  either  on  the  17th  or  ISth,  and  it 
was  not  until  noon  to-day  that  we  discovered  what  a  strong 
current  we  have  had  against  us.  In  the  first  thirty  Incurs 
after  leaving  Bock  Island  we  had  a  current  of  138  miles, 
and  from  noon  yesterday  to  noon  to-day  eighty-two  miles, 
right  in  our  teeth.  The  weather  is  now  fine,  wind  ahead, 
and  a  good  many  fishing-boats  about.  We  are  passing  the 
land  on  the  north  side  of  the  straits,  within  three  or  four 
miles,  which  is  high  everywhere.  Aneroid  has  risen  con- 
siderably since  last  evening ;  temperature  68^ 

20^ — Noon,  to-day  248  miles,  from  the  North  Saddle,  or 
828  miles  from  the  anchorage  of  Shanghae,  going  ten  and 
a  half  knots.  Bun  since  yesterday  217  miles*  Aneroid 
Btill  rising,  30*5 ;  temperature  64^ 


CHAPTEK  V. 


to 


^Tdcgnpli  to  Kachti,  then  bj  Onalft 


Ch««foov  ihm  fil-Ehaert  pUee  m  ChiBft — Land 


Obacmsory — T«npl«a»  that  to  < 


Mr  Gnat— FeldB— WM«f • 
»— LamcMria— IiMCt  of  Bnddhft- 
mucrr— Women  with  hmU 


2Ii^.— Made  Barren  Island^  and  at  1.30  p.m.  took  a  pilot 
off  the  North  Saddle.  Anchored  in  Shanghae,  five  and  a 
half  days  from  Yokohama^  the  whole  distance  1050  miles. 
Took  up  mj  quarters  at  the  Astor  House. 

Apparently,  most  unfortunately  for  me,  three  steamen 
left  for  Tientsin  early  on  the  morning  of  the  22d,  and  I  was 
prevented  j3rom  taking  adyantage  of  either  of  them,  from 
having  to  provide  myself  with  Sycee  fiilver  for  the  trip 
across  Mongolia  before  I  could  leave. 

Weather  nne  and  cooL  Temperature  in  my  room,  where 
the  fire  has  been  out  more  than  eight  hours,  62^ 

Met  at  the  hotel  a  Grerman  merchant  established  at  Port 
May  (on  the  Amoor),  who  had  lately  come  acroaa  from 
Kiachta  in  Asiatic  Russia.  He  rode  on  camels  all  the  way, 
and  reached  Kalgan  in  fourteen  days..  The  distance  must 
be  S50  miles  or  ICOO  versts.  He  gave  me  valuable  informa- 
tion as  to  money  and  stopping-places  between  this  and 
Pekin.  as  well  as  the  cost  of  camels,  or  rather  their  hire. 
He  made  the  journey  to  Kiachta  from  Port  May,  in  January, 
on  the  ice,  and  in  a  sledge  drawn  by  horses. 

25^ii,  Sunday. — ^At  the  Episcopal  Church,  heaid  the  Bev. 
Mr  Butcher.    In  the  afternoon,  Mr  Thomas  at  the  Scotch 


2tVi. — Visited  the  Chinese  city.  It  is  a  quaint  old  place 
surrounded  by  a  wall  some  four  to  five  miles  in  circumfer- 
ence, and  contains,  it  is  said,  130,000  inhabitants.    The 


BOUND  FOR  CHEEFOO  AND  TIENTSIN.        89 

temples,  tea-houses,  and  cnrio-shops  are  well  worth  seeing. 
The  streets  are  very  narrow,  and  dirty  in  the  extreme ;  an 
open  and  very  offensive  ditch  runs  through  a  considerable 
portion  of  the  town,  and,  as  in  all  Chinese  towns,  a  sewer 
nms  through  the  centre  of  every  street,  covered  up  with  slabs 
of  granite. 

We  witnessed  in  the  course  of  our  ramble  some  wonderful 
feats  of  dexterity  performed  by  a  juggler,  who  also,  apparently 
with  great  ease,  passed  down  his  throat  two  swords,  and 
kept  them  down  for  a  good  three  minutes ;  they  were 
eighteen  inches  long  and  two  inches  broad,  common  rusty- 
looking  swords. 

Although  Sunday  is  not  a  holiday  for  the  Chinese,  yet  so 
many  of  them  employed  by  foreigners  are  necessarUy  idle 
on  that  day,  that  it  is  so  forcibly  for  a  large  portion  of  the 
working  population,  which  accounts,  I  suppose,  for  the  large 
number  we  saw  in  the  city  yesterday  amusing  themselves 
in  the  tea-houses  with  jugglers,  and  more  than  all,  in 
street  gambling,  to  which  the  Chinese  are  inveterately 
addicted. 

21th. — Here  I  am  on  board  the  Ta-Pang-Nyo  steamer,  and 
have  been  on  board  for  the  last  six  hours,  bound  for  Cheefoo 
and  Tientsin.  We  ought  to  have  left  at  noon.  At  2  p.m. 
made  an  ineffectual  attempt  at  a  start.  It  was  blowing 
fresh  at  the  time,  and  jammed  as  we  were,  and  are  still, 
between  the  wharf  and  a  steamer  outside  of  us,  with  the 
wind  from  S.K,  an  excuse  was  made  for  not  getting  away, 
whether  a  valid  one  or  not  may  be  doubted.  At  any  rate 
here  we  are  still  at  6  p.m.,  and  though  the  wind  has  sub- 
sided considerably,  it  seems  likely  we  will  have  to  remain 
here  to-night  It  is  a  bore,  but  cannot  be  helped  ;  it  is  but 
a  few  hours  lost,  not  much,  perhaps,  seeing  that  it  is  the 
commencement  of  a  journey  which  in  all  human  probability 
is  likely  to  last  four  months.  The  captain  has  a  young  wife 
and  a  young  family  on  board,  and  who  can  say  that  that  has 
not  had  something  to  do  with  our  detention  ?  The  captain 
has  just  announced  that  we  do  not  start  until  four  in  the 
morning.  Passage  to  Tientsin  fifty  taels,  the  tael  about  six 
shillings  and  sixpence.    Temperature  in  shade  60^ 

Telegrams  from  England  usually  come  in  seventeen  days 


i 


90        TELEGRAMS— GRANTS  PONY  EXPRESS. 


from  KiacQCsL  later  news  than  the  P.  O.  from  GUIe  by  four 
or  fire  davs  :  though  messages  hare  to  be  brought  on  horse- 
back fr:m  Kiachca  to  Tient;sm^  a  distance  of  over  one  thousand 
miles,  and  this  takes  bj  Grant*3  ponj  express  some  twelve 
daySy  and  the  steamer  finom  Tientsin  to  Shanghae  four  dayi 
more. 

2StL — Got  under  weigh  at  3.30  JlJLj  and  after  knoddng 
some  ein^erbread  work  off  the  stem  of  the  steamer  that 
barred  our  war^  preTenting  us  getting  ont  the  preyious  day, 
and  running  into  a  ship  at  anchor  in  the  stream,  and  doing 
her  a  few  taels*  worth  of  damage,  we  got  fiiirlj  into  the 
river ;  at  half-past  seven  we  were  abreast  of  the  lightship, 
a  distance  of  some  thirty-jiTe  miles,  and  ever  since  we  have 
been  bowling  along,  sometimes  eight  knots,  and  occasionallT 
when  the  sails  would  draw,  eleven  knots  an  hour.  All  day 
fresh  breeze  from  S.E.,  with  thick  unpleasant  weather. 

29tA. — Same  weather  as  yesterday  part  of  the  day ;  wind 
got  round  to  N.,  with  clear  weather  and  a  tumble  of  a  sea, 
which  kept  the  passengers  in  their  berths. 

30^^ — 7  A.¥.,  foggy ;  got  a  glimpse  of  the  land,  which  told 
us  where  we  were :  the  lead  has  been  constantly  going  for 
many  hours ;  the  soundings  have  been  seven  to  eight  &thomfl, 
where,  acconling  to  the  charts,  we  ought  to  have  found 
twelve.  Passed  through  shoals  of  greateSj  and  saw  a  few 
albatrosses. 

The  Ta-Pan^Xyo  is  an  iron  screw,  669  tons,  engines  of 
180  horse-power,  built  by  Gordon  of  Port-Glasgow  in  1864 ; 
she  was  sold  eighteen  months  ago  to  a  Japanese  Damio  for 
120,000  taels,  about  £50,000,  and  bought  back  from  him 
four  months  since  for  15,000  dollars,  or  £3000.  This 
Damio,  it  seems,  has  sffiied  with  the  Tycoon  in  the  rebellion 
at  present  existing  in  Japan,  and  finding  himself  on  the 
losing  side,  he  was  glad  to  sell  the  Ta-PangSyo  in  order 
to  prevent  her  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  opposite 
party. 

A  son  of  Lord  Elcho's,  and  a  Mr  Pollock,  an  invalid 
Shanghae  merchant  going  to  Cheefoo  in  search  of  health,  and 
myself,  are  the  only  four  passengers.  The  two  former  have 
come  across  from  San  Francisco,  and  are  on  their  way  home 
by  Mongolia,  Siberia,  and  Bussia. 


TAKU  FORTS.  91 

3(Mi. — Our  visit  to  Cheefoo  is  past  and  gone,  and  we  are 
agmin  wending  our  way  homewards;  but  first  we  have  to 
call  at  Tientsin,  where  we  hope  to  arrive  to-morrow  night. 

I  am  now  passing  over  the  last  bit  of  salt  water  (barring 
the  English  Channel)  that  lies  between  me  and  home.  I 
landed  at  Cheefoo  at  1  p.m.,  walked  over  the  settlement, 
which  consists  of  half-a-dozen  foreign  residences  and 
godowns,  built  mostly  of  stone,  and  then  strolled  through 
the  native  town,  which  I  found  to  be  the  filthiest  of  all 
Chinese  towns  I  had  yet  visited,  and  full  of  the  most  villanous 
smells ;  the  houses  miserable  hovels,  and  the  streets  thronged 
with  wretchedness  and  misery.  The  town  is  on  a  flat,  and 
so  is  the  settlement ;  but  close  at  hand  is  the  Flagstaff  Hill, 
upon  which  the  English  Consulate  is  located.  High  hills 
at  no  great  distance  surround  the  town  and  settlement. 

\9t  May. — ^At  anchor  off  the  bar  of  Tientsin,  waiting  for 
a  flood-tide  to  cross,  upon  which  at  low  tide  there  is  only 
four  feet  water,  and  at  high-water  ordinary  tides  there  is  but 
little  over  twelve  feet,  at  least  so  says  the  pilot  who  came 
on  board  at  11  a.m.  We  shall  not  be  able  to  cross  the  bar 
until  high  water,  6  p.h.  Weather  fine.  We  have  been 
nineteen  hours  from  Cheefoo  to  the  Tientsin  bar,  a  distance 
of  190  miles.  The  only  land  we  have  yet  seen  is  a  long  low 
mad  island  four  or  five  feet  high,  which  dates  back  only  some 
very  few  years.  All  across  from  Cheefoo  we  have  had  little 
over  five  to  twelve  fathoms  water,  the  water  being  as  thick 
as  buttermilk ;  many  people  consider  that  the  whole  of  the 
gulf  will  at  no  distant  date  be  land  instead  of  water.  I 
might  say  I  think  there  are  a  thousand  fishing-boats  in 
light,  and  three  or  four  square-rigged  vessels,  besides  many 
la^e  junks. 

The  Taku  forts  are  in  sight,  a  couple  or  three  miles  off. 

Our  captain,  when  the  Spaniards  were  lately  in  the  Pacific, 
took  a  cargo  of  coals  across  in  the  Newsboy  from  Australia, 
and  sold  it  at  Coquimbo  to  the  Spanish  admiral.  He  kept 
it  on  board  for  the  Spaniards  some  four  or  five  months. 

The  TorPang-Nyo  is  chartered  by  T.  k  Co.  for  eight 
montha  at  6000  dollars  a  month,  the  charterers  finding  coal ; 
not  a  bad  charter ;  her  portage  bill  is  about  1400  dollars  a 
month ;  captain's  pay  is  240  dollars  a  month ;  the  mate  7? 


92  PEKIN—OBSER  VA  TORY. 

dollars;  the  chief  engineer  150  dollars;  the  second  100 
dollars.  The  captain  receives  also  from  the  charterers  100 
dollars  a  month  and  half-pilotage  when  he  takes  charge 
himself,  which  makes  his  pay  a  good  £100  sterling  s 
month. 

Learnt  from  the  pilot  that  Mr  Grant,  whom  I  had  hoped 
to  have  joined  here  as  a  companion  to  Eliachta,  left  Tientsin 
for  Pekin  about  eight  days  ago. 

2iL — ^Arrived  at  Tientsin  11  A.H.  Found  a  note  from  Hr 
Grant ;  he  left  Tientsin  on  the  20th  April.  Hired  through 
the  innkeeper,  Tachou,  a  cart  for  Pekin  for  six  dollars. 

Zd. — Left  Tientsin  in  a  cart  drawn  by  two  moles  at  5 
A.H.,  arriving  at  the  half-way  house  at  6  p.ic.,  sleeping 
there. 

Mh. — Left  at  4.30  a.m.,  arriving  at  4  p.ir.  at  Pekin.  ICr 
Grant  left  this  for  Ealgan  on  the  Ist  Delivered  my  letters 
of  introduction  to  Mr  Adkins,  the  Chinese  interpreter  at  the 
Legation.     Temperature  in  my  room  at  Wang's  Hotel  72^ 

^th. —  Sallied  out  mounted  on  a  pony,  with  a  sharp  boy 
from  Wang's,  to  visit  some  of  the  sights  in  Pekin. 

We  first  went  to  the  Observatory  on  the  wall.  It  is 
interesting  from  its  age,  having  been  established  they  say  dur- 
ing the  Ming  dynasty,  and  doubtless  worked  afterwards  more 
scientifically  by  the  Jesuits,  of  whose  labours  in  that  direction 
Father  Yerbiest's  splendid  bronze  celestial  globe,  six  feet  in 
diameter,  is  there  to  bear  testimony.  There  is  also  other 
astronomical  apparatus  in  this  ancient  Observatory ;  but  no 
use  is  now  made  of  this  place,  and  indeed  it  is  probable  it 
became  entirely  neglected  very  soon  after  the  expulsion  of 
the  Jesuits.  The  Pekin  wall  at  the  point  where  the  Observa- 
tory is  situated,  I  should  judge,  but  I  could  not  get  upon  to 
measure  it,  to  be  about  sixty  feet  thick. 

From  the  Observatory  a  good  half-hour's  sharp  trot 
brought  us  to  a  cluster  of  temples.  The  first  we  entered 
was  that  dedicated  to  Confucius,  in  which  it  is  said  the 
Emperor  worships  once  a  year.  It  is  destitute  of  painting 
or  image,  a  simple  piece  of  wood  a  foot  high  upon  a  central 
altar  represents  ODufucius ;  the  characters  upon  it  spell  his 
name  I  am  told.  On  each  side  of  the  hall  or  temple  are 
ranged  in  appropriate  nooks  a  number  of  other  pieces  of 


TEMPLE  OF  CONFUCIUS.  93 

wood  Bimilar  more  or  less  to  that  which  represents  Con- 
fbciiis,  with  characters  upon  them,  said  to  be  placed  there  in 
honour  of  certain  of  Confucius'  disciples  and  commentators. 
The  building  has  a  magnificent  ceiUng,  around  which  are 
a  number  of  painted  boards  with  the  names  of  defunct 
emperors  in  golden  letters,  placed  there,  however,  on  their 
acoesaion  to  power.  The  courtyard  contains  some  very  fine 
old  trees,  yews,  I  think,  said  to  have  been  planted  more  than 
500  years  ago ;  the  largest  I  could  measure  in  girth  fifteen 
feet,  which  it  carried  all  the  way  up  the  main  stem  and 
trunk.  Some  old  stones  ranged  in  rows  in  two  separate 
buildings,  three  feet  high,  and  two  feet  in  diameter  at  the 
base,  round,  and  with  rounded  tops,  said  to  date  back  2600 
years  (are  they  not  the  Lingam  ?) 

The  pavilion,  erected  by  the  Emperor  Eienloong,  is  stand- 
ing in  the  centre  of  a  square,  surrounded  by  a  moat  filled 
with  stagnant  water.  The  interior  was  covered  everywhere 
with  a  good  inch  of  dust,  and  the  floor  with  hard  on  six 
inches  of  the  same. 

I  visited  several  of  the  Lamesaries  (temples  and  convents 
of  the  Mongol  Lamas),  they  are  more  or  less  in  bad  condi- 
tion, and  seemed  to  me  to  contain  very  few  priests.  The 
gUt  image,  or  rather  bronzed  image  of  Buddha,  made  of 
wood,  72  feet  high,  has  a  separate  building  appropriated  to 
it,  and  so  jammed  is  it  in  its  confined  habitation  that  in 
no  part  of  the  building  can  one  get  far  enough  from  it  to 
obtain  a  good  view  of  the  monster.  By  a  series  of  narrow 
and  dark  staircases  you  ascend  to  several  stories,  and  at  last 
reach  one  from  which  you  get  perhaps  the  best  views,  at 
any  rate  of  the  upper  part  of  Buddha.  This  fellow,  however, 
is  not  half  the  man  the  great  Daiboots  is  at  Eamakura,  near 
Tokohama. 

The  streets  of  Pekin,  the  principal  ones  at  any  rate, 
through  which  I  passed  to-day,  are  very  wide,  and  more 
than  one  of  them  with  a  raised  causeway  in  the  centre  and 
a  deep  depression  on  either  side.  They  are  now  with  a 
foot  of  dust  everywhere,  and  full  of  rut-holes  and  inequali- 
ties of  dangerous  dimensions  from  end  to  end,  and  lumbered 
up  with  men  working  at  all  sorts  of  trades — carpenters, 
sawyers,  Ac.  &c. ;  of  course  there  is  not  an  inch  of  pavement 


94  MUCH  WRETCHEDNESS. 

anjwhaie  that  I  saw,  and  in  wet  weather  they  most  be 
impassable.  Their  character  maj  be  guessed  by  the  fact 
that  the  thousand  and  one  poblic  vehicles  in  which  people 
ride  in  Pekin  are  carts  qnite  guiltless  of  springs ;  a  yehicle 
with  springs  would  have  but  a  short  life  of  it  in  this  capital 
of  the  great  empire  of  China.  And  the  mass  of  the  houses 
that  line  these  streets,  what  are  thej  like  ?  Why,  generally 
they  are  more  like  booths  at  a  fair  than  anything  else,  with 
the  fronts  covered  with  signboards  of  all  shapes  and  sizes, 
thickly  covered  with  characters  descriptive  of  the  contents 
to  be  found  within,  with  perhaps  as  much  truth  in  them  as 
the  puffs  in  our  newspapers  contain. 

Wretchedness,  half-clothed  and  no-clothed,  you  meet  at 
every  turn.  Of  course  there  are  exceptions  to  this  miserable 
class  of  street  buildings ;  a  shop  has  occasionally  any  amount 
of  gQding,  but  these  are  few  and  far  between.  Then,  again, 
the  residences  of  the  mandarins  are  large  enclosures  inside  of 
high  walls,  and  for  aught  I  know,  may  be  very  fine  houses ; 
but  the  mass  of  the  people  inhabit  dirty  hovels. 

I  proposed  to  my  guide  this  morning  to  visit  a  mandarines 
establishment^  and  he  replied  such  a  visit  would  cost  him  his 
head.  ^ 

There  is  a  fair  show  in  the  streets,  as  far  as  nmnbers  go,  of 
camels  (two-humped),  mules,  and  ponies ;  some  of  the  mules 
are  very  fine  animals. 

The  women  are  no  better  looking  than  elsewhere  that  I  have 
seen  in  China.  They  have  nearly  all  small  feet;  the  men 
are  larger  considerably  than  in  the  southern  provinces. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Pekin  to  KUchta — Seeguash,  eat  with  chopsticks — Pelted  by  boys — Country  well 

enltlTatad — Nankow  Pass,  bad  roads — Inner  Wall  of  China — Sha-tow — Sha* 

chung — Hwai-lai-hien,  bridge — River   Tangho— Grandfathers  only  allowed 

to   wear  beards — Temperance  v,   drunkenness — Suen-wha-fu — Irrigation — 

Coals — ^Kalgan,  author  comes  up  with  Mr  Grant,  entrepot  between  Russia 

and  China — Population  of  Chinese  and  Mongols,  few  Russians — The  Great 

Wall — Dust-^torm — Tauist  temple — Leave  with  carts,  horses,  and  camels — 

Temple  of  Daban — Touart  (tent)  and  temple — Mongols — Lakes — Mounds  of 

stone— Chazar  tribes — Child  offered  for  sale — No  herbage — Lake  Boro— 

Steppe— Mongols  superstitions — Lakes — Sand  mounds — The  only  milestone 

— Antelopes — Borulgen  Well — Iren  Salt  Lake — Desert  of  Gobi — Dust-storm 

— Khalkhas  territory — Oude — Touarts,  flocks  and  herds — Russian  post — Mon* 

gols  are  all  beggars — Pass  Chinese  carts — Tarachi  (well) — Author  has  to  take 

to  a  camel,  nothing  for  them  to  eat — Darkin  Mountain — Steppe — Rain — 

Frost — Laina  Mandarin  sets  praying-machine  to  work — ^Tolla  river — Urga, 

headquarters  of   Lamas,  Russian   consul— Procure  a  praying- box — Chinese 

socampment — Cross  the  Iro  river — Arriveat  Kiachta — Dinner  with  celebrities, 

customs — Great  depot  between  Russia  and  China — Gold  mines — Cossacks — 

Yegetation — Climate    same    as    Canada — Hospitality — Oost — Keeran,  rich 

chorchea — Pigeons  not  killed — Enterprise  repressed    by  Russians — Circus 

going  to  Pekin — Lama  King  of  the  Mongols,  mode  of  finding. 

May  6tL — ^A  litter,  hired  for  twenty-five  dollars,  with 
a  mule  for  the  luggage,  was  at  my  door  by  8  a.m.  I 
afterwards  hired  a  riding  pony.  I  had,  however,  to  wait  for 
mj  passports,  which  I  did  not  get  all  in  order  until  near 
11  A«M.,  when  we  made  a  fair  start  from  Pekin  for  Kal- 
gan,  or  as  the  Chinese  call  it,  Chan-kea-kow,  in  a  N.W. 
direction. 

We  are  now  for  the  night  at  the  village  of  Seeguash, 
twenty-one  miles  from  Pekin. 

The  room  in  which  I  am  is  pretty  clean,  and  I  have  had 
a  tolerable  supper  of  eggs,  boiled  mutton  and  rice,  but  was 
obliged  to  eat  with  the  chopsticks,  and  managed  to  do  not 
Mniss.    Temperature  in  room  75**. 

We  have  passed  through  an  entirely  flat  country  to-day, 
though  now  close  to  the  hills,  and  through  some,  but  not 
many,  villages.  The  country  is  everywhere  cultivated,  the 
wheat  and  barley  looking  full,  but  want  rain  now;    the 


96  PEKIN  TO  KIACHTA—NANKOW. 

millet  was  jnst  coming  above  the  groond.  All  tlie  women 
BO  far  have  small  feet 

On  entering  Seegaash,  I  was  pelted  with  stones  by  a 
crowd  of  boys ;  this  is  very  annsual  nowadays  anywhere  in 
China.  Soon  after  I  had  reached  the  inn,  a  gentleman  also 
travelling  towards  Ealgan,  and  who  was  at  the  same  inn, 
came  to  see  me.  He  turned  out  to  be  a  Bussian,  and  as  he 
spoke  no  language  but  his  own,  our  conversation  was  very 
limited. 

1th. — I  was  on  pony-back  at  5.30,  and  by  9  we  reached 
Nankowy  a  considerable  town  situated  at  the  eastern  extremity 
of  the  pass  of  that  name.  The  plain  we  had  just  passed  over 
is  very  stony,  and  but  partially  cultivated  in  consequence ; 
it  is  the  first  piece  of  stony  ground  I  had  seen  in  China 
since  leaving  Hong-Kong.  The  crops  on  it  are  wheat,  barley, 
and  millet  We  met  many  carts  laden  with  grain  before 
we  arrived  at  Nankow,  going  towards  Pekin.  On  leaving 
Nankow,  we  at  once  entered  the  pass,  the  width  of  it  vary- 
ing from  perhaps  a  quarter  of  a  mile  at  the  Nankow  end,  to 
only  some  twenty  feet  at  the  other  extremity ;  a  wall  of 
volcanic  mountains  lining  it  on  both  sides  fix>m  end  to  end. 
The  length  of  the  pass  must  be  about  sixteen  miles,  for  it 
took  eight  hours  to  clear  it,  and  though  the  whole  bed  of 
the  pass  is  filled  with  boulders  of  all  sizes,  we  got  through 
it  at  the  rate  of  two  miles  an  hour.  I  was  told  it  was  an 
impossibility  for  a  cart  to  pass  through  it,  and  so  I  thought 
as  I  contemplated  the  track  from  the  back  of  my  pony,  wheUi 
lo  and  behold  !  right  before  us  was  a  cart  going  our  way ;  in 
its  movements  over  among  the  boulders,  it  looked  exactly 
like  a  light  vessel  tumbling  about  on  the  tops  of  the  billows 
in  a  short  irregular  sea.  The  cart  held  its  way,  and  kept 
ahead  of  us  all  through  the  pass.  It  was  empty,  but  even 
so  it  is  a  miracle  to  me  how  it  could  be  built  strong  enough 
to  stand  such  work.  Its  wheels  (two)  were  about  five  feet 
in  diameter,  and  the  covered  body  six  feet  in  length,  and 
proved  on  examination  to  be  as  strong  as  wood  and  iron 
could  make  it  The  pair  of  mules  attached  to  it  went  over 
the  ground  as  securely  as  if  it  had  been  a  macadamised  road ; 
the  whole  operation  struck  me  with  wonder,  accustomed  as 
I  have  been  to  travel  on  rough  roads.     I  suppose  the  cart 


INNER  WALL^GOTHIC  ARCHES.  97 

most  have  brought  a  load  from  Ealgan  to  Pekin,  and  was 
retnming  empty ;  but  how  it  conld  have  passed  with  a  load 
in  it  passes  my  comprehension. 

Every  now  and  then,  as  we  jogged  along,  parts  of  the  Inner 
Wall  of  China  came  in  sight,  running  np  some  very  high 
ridges  of  the  mountains,  almost  perpendicular  in  places,  and 
following  the  ridges  in  all  their  sinuosities,  and  then  again 
crossing  our  path.  The  road  is  barred  by  it  in  several  places ; 
but  at  the  narrow  extremity  of  the  pass,  from  its  height, 
some  forty  feet,  and  as  many  in  thickness,  it  looks  like  what 
must  have  been  in  other  days,  at  any  rate,  a  formidable 
obstacle  to  an  invading  force. 

On  debouching  from  the  pass,  we  entered  the  walled  town 
of  Sha-tow,  and  there  we  have  ended  our  day's  work  at 
2.30  p.H. ;  but  there  was  no  prevailing  the  Chinamen  to  pro- 
ceed any  further  to-day.  As  we  emerged  from  the  pass  my 
aneroid  gave  a  height  of  nearly  2500  feet  above  Pekin. 
Temperature  in  shade  7S^.  Yesterday  and  to-day  I  had  to 
eat  my  dinner  with  chopsticks ;  I  shall  be  able  to  handle 
them  pretty  well  by  the  time  I  reach  Kalgan. 

86L — Sha-chung.  I  have  just  eaten  my  dinner,  and  with 
chopsticks ;  there  is  no  alternative  but  with  one's  fingers, 
and  that  would  be  setting  a  bad  example  to  the  Chinese,  for 
there  is  neither  knife,  fork,  or  spoon  to  be  had  hereabouts. 

We  left  Sha-tow  at  5.30  A.U.,  and  our  day's  tramp  has 

been,  with  little  exception,  over  arid  ground,  where  the  crops 

are  consequently  not  very  luxuriant     We  stopped  to  break- 

&8t  at  Hwai-lai-hien,  a  good-sized  walled  town,  which  has 

one  really  good  street  in  a  line  with  the  principal  gate.     It 

is  wide  for  China,  and  has  a  regular  covered  way,  worthy  the 

name  of  arcade,  perhaps,  running  from  end  to  end  on  both 

tides  of  it.     Tou  enter  the  gateway  over  a  stone  bridge  of 

fire  Gothic  arches,  and  otherwise  well  built     Mr  Michie  in 

lus  work  *  says  it  is  a  bridge  without  water,  that  the  river 

^Uch  once  ran  there  has  disappeared.     Now  the  river  has 

oome  back  again,  for  there  was  a  stream  twenty  yards  wide, 

^  leasts  running  under  it  as  I  passed  over  it    Before  arriv- 

iiig  ftt  Hwai-lai-hien,  I  had  noticed  a  good  deal  of  water  in 

&  depression  we  were  skirting,  and  wondered  where  it  came 

•  ••  TIm  ^b«rUn  OTerknd  Route."    John  Murray,  1862. 

O 


9S  ROJIAX  ARCH—YANGHO  RIVER. 

from,  for  it  has  hardlr  rained,  thej  say,  for  the  last  seven 
months,  and  the  crops  are  generally  snjBering  very  much  in 
consequence.  On  reaching  Hwai-lai-hien  the  riddle  was 
solved ;  the  water  came  from  that  direction,  but  it  was  lost 
in  the  arid  soil  some  few  miles  further  on.  I  traced  the 
river  afterwards  coming  down  the  valley,  and  I  have  no 
donbt  I  shall  find  to-morrow  that  it  is  the  Tangho,  which 
runs  past  Chiminge,  and  which  Mr  Michie  supposes  to  have 
changed  its  course*  The  single  arch  which  stands  some  two 
or  three  hundred  feet  from  the  bridge  with  five  Gothic- 
looking  arches*  and  which  Mr  Michie  thinks  once  formed 
part  of  the  said  five-arched  bridge,  is  a  Roman  arch,  and 
very  iil-built  compared  with  the  five  Gothic  arches.  It  stands 
wher^  there  is  no  water  at  present.  If  Mr  Michie  had 
passed  here  in  May,  in  place  of  August,  he  would  have  found 
the  five-arched  bridge  was  not  whoUv  useless. 

As  I  pass  thr\>ugh  some  of  these  northern  towns,  at  times 
I  get  regularly  mobbed ;  my  white  beard  I  believe  is  the 
attraction.  To-day  on  entering  Hwai-lai-hien,  coming 
through  the  handsome  street  I  have  mentioned,  a  slight 
collision  with  some  camels  obliged  us  to  stop  for  a  few 
minutes.  I  was  mounted  on  the  pony  at  the  time,  and  in 
two  minutes  such  a  c:\wd  (a  very  good-natured  crowd) 
g;!i:hor>M  about  me  that  I  could  hardly  get  clear  of  it^  A 
Iarv>>  white  Ward  is  something  new.  it  would  seem,  for  these 
smvvth-f^v.vxi  Chinameu.  When  a  Chinaman  becomes  a 
grandr'ktl  cr  he  is  |>em::t:ed  to  grow  a  beard  and  moustache, 
if  he  car:,  but  I  have  never  seen  anything  beyond  a  few 
s;r;iiv  ha::^  rrvduced  ev\rn  with  the  motst  diliirent  cultivatioiL 

This.  tvx\  is  a  wallcc  town ;  in  fai»  all  the  towns  and 
nx^;  o:  the  villaipe^  in  t^is  part  of  C&ina,  dose  to  the 
Mor:Cv^*:*n  r'ixntierss.  hav-*  s^.-'C^e  s^v;  of  w:ill  azoimd  them. 

Te:::r<ra;ure,  c^  r.x..  i-  :xv2i.  7S\  The  aneroid  shows 
th^  t  Ia; V.  we  have  ever  u*v«rir^  over  t*>-dav  to  be  2200  feet 

The*e  Ch:r.aaien  a:w  c::rl:G>  :VIV>ws:  a  whole  doaen  of 
:hnf r:  ar>e  ::x"w  s;ar>ii.r.c  arv>:rsi  oe  wasohing  with  apparent 
i":::<rrv>s;  ev^ery  wocvi  i  :s:;  Cv  wn.  I  dzd  tbe::e  is  no  use  in 
KfiXj:  or;»:y  with  the:^ :  th<y  «oa  g\f^  tared  if  kfk  to  do  as 
ih<y  I^^^  ;i^  1^::  ^r;iu;  cdf  Ittvisf  sk  and  my  beard  in 


TEA  AND  LIQVOR-'CHIMINGE.  99 

qniet.  Of  course  these  hostelries  are  always  full  of  people. 
Early  the  day  after  to-morrow  I  should  arrive  at  Kalgan, 
and  it  will  be  good  fortune  for  me  if  I  find  Mr  Grant  still 
there*  A  note  which  I  found  from  him  at  the  Legation  in 
Pekin  said  he  would  leave  Kalgan  for  Kiachta  about  the 
8th  of  May — that  is,  to-day. 

At  tea-drinking  I  am  getting  as  bad  as  the  Chinamen. 
What  an  advantage  has  temperance  over  drunkenness ! 
These  Chinamen  js^et  as  merry  as  grigs  over  their  tea-drink- 
ing; talk  fourteen  to  the  dozen,  yet  never  get  out  of 
temper  with  one  another,  and  never  have  a  headache  from 
their  tea-drinking:  they  are  a  large  and  heavy  looking 
people  in  this  northern  part  of  China,  seem  very  good- 
naturedy  and  are  always  good-humoured. 

I  have  to-day  for  the  first  time  met  some  Mongols  with 
camels  and  one  drove  of  very  lean  ponies  going  towards 
Pekin,  with  two  small  flocks  of  sheep,  seemingly  large  in 
bone,  white  bodies,  with  either  black  or  brown  heads,  and 
large  ears  and  tail,  with  wool  that  makes  them  look  very 
like  a  cross  between  a  sheep  and  a  goat 

9M,  Sunday. — Suen-wha-fu.  Here  we  are  for  the  night 
Left  Sha-chung  at  4.30  a.m.,  arriving  here  at  4.30  p.ir.  The 
road  has  been  over  a  very  rocky  sort  of  terrace,  raised  some- 
what above  the  rest  of  the  valley,  and  skirting  the  southern 
range  of  hills  for  a  considerable  distance.  I  could  trace  the 
river  in  the  valley  below  us  running  towards  Hwai-lai-hien, 
and  soon  afterwards  we  got  down  upon  it  at  Chiminge, 
where  it  was  running  rapidly.  It  is  the  Yangho,  and  no 
doubt  must  be  the  same  I  saw  running  under  the  bridge  at 
Hwai-lai-hien,  losing  itself  in  the  sands  some  eight  or  ten 
miles  below  the  last-named  place. 

I  observed  two  troops  of  Chinamen  hard  at  work  upon 
two  aqueducts  for  irrigation  purposes ;  the  unusually  dry 
weather  has  set  them  to  work. 

Breakfasted  at  Chiminge.  Met  many  troops  of  mules  and 
donkeys  to-day  carrying  grain  to  Pekin,  and  some  with  coals 
from  the  hills  we  passed.  There  are  six  litters  now  in  the 
yard,  all  travelling  towards  Kalgan.  Temperature  70**.  We 
have  been  ascending  to-day,  and  are  now  2400  feet  above 


loo        COME  UP  WITH  MR  GRANT— KALGAN. 

Pekin.     The  Russian  who  called  upon  me  has  kept  company 
along  the  road. 

Wih. — Leaving  Suen-wha-fu  at  6.30  a.m.  yesterday,  at 
noon  reached  our  destination,  Kalgan,  and  I  was  not  a 
little  pleased  to  find  that  I  had  caught  up  Mr  Grant ;  and  I 
am  only  just  in  time,  for  we  start  to-morrow  for  Kiachta. 
The  road  was  stony  and  sandy  almost  from  beginning  to  end, 
and  a  great  portion  of  the  valley  not  under  cultivation,  and 
the  crops  where  it  was  cultivated  were  not  looking  very 
bright ;  a  few  willow  and  poplar  trees  were  to  be  seen,  but 
nothing  more.  The  villages  we  passed  were  not  half  so 
comfortable  looking  as  those  we  had  previously  met  with; 
in  fact  the  country  hereabout  is  very  poor  land,  and  its 
poverty  is  reflected  in  the  inhabitants  and  in  their  houses. 

Kalgan  is  a  straggling  town,  and  may  contain  160,000 
inhabitants,  Chinese  principally,  a  few  Mongols,  and  perhaps 
a  dozen  Bossian  merchants. 

Part  of  the  great  wall  is  here  seen  stretching  across  the 
valley,  and  this  is  kept  in  repair ;  but  the  continuation  of  the 
wall,  running  up  the  spurs  of  the  hills  which  narrow  the 
passage  in  this  part,  is  in  a  state  of  ruin.  It  is  from  this 
narrow  part  the  place  takes  its  name,  Kalgan,  being  a 
corruption  of  what  in  the  Mongol  language  means  the  gate, 
and  such  also  is  the  meaning  of  the  Chinese  name  Chan- 
kea-kow.  This  is  the  great  entrepot  for  all  the  business 
carried  on  between  Russia  and  China,  and  every  day  may  be 
seen  strings  of  camels,  mules,  and  donkeys  moving  either 
in  one  direction  or  the  other.  Weather  keeps  fine,  but  some* 
what  colder.  Yesterday  experienced  a  dust-storm,  a  common 
occurrence  in  this  part  of  China,  and  a  very  disagreeable 
.  one  too.  According  to  my  aneroid,  Ealgan  stands  3000  feet 
above  Pekin,  and  the  tower  on  the  spur  of  the  range  of  hills 
of  Kalgan,  up  which  the  great  wall  is  carried  northwards, 
directly  over  the  town,  is  600  feet  high  from  its  base.  The 
great  wall  running  over  this  spur  or  ridge  is  built  of  loose 
stones,  and  it  is  not  more  than  twelve  feet  thick  at  the  base 
and  three  feet  wide  on  the  top.  It  has  tumbled  down  more 
or  less  all  along  this  spur.  The  hill  here  is  very  difficult  of 
ascent,  and  I  suppose  would  be  considered  almost  impracti- 


TAURISH  AND  BUDDHIST  TEMPLE.  loi 

cable  for  troops,  and  hence  the  insignificance  of  the  wall  in 
this  part 

12M. — ^Employed  in  purchasing  a  few  articles  necessary 
for  our  journey,  and  whilst  doing  so  we  stumbled  upon  a 
Taoist  temple,  which  proved  worth  a  visit  Examined  an- 
other part  of  the  great  wall ;  it  is  built  of  uncut  stones,  about 
fourteen  feet  high  and  the  same  thickness  at  the  base,  run- 
ning up  to  nothing  at  the  top.  In  several  parts  it  is  quite 
perfect,  with  the  exception  of  the  mortar  the  weather  has 
destroyed.  The  great  defence  against  invasion  exists  no 
doubt  at  the  gate  of  the  Nankow  Pass;  there  the  walls 
across  in  that  narrow  part  are  triple,  high  and  thick ;  and 
following  in  the  line  of  road,  the  ruins  of  numerous  towers  are 
seen  covering  a  considerable  extent  of  country,  and  within 
a  few  hundred  yards  of  each  other. 

14^ — Our  carts  had  been  in  course  of  preparation  for 
two  days,  and  yesterday  morning  we  were  ready  for  a  start 
The  horses  destined  to  take  us  over  rough  ground  for  some 
twenty-six  miles  were  in  the  yard  pretty  early,  but  it  was 
noon  before  Mr  Grant  finished  his  business,  and  at  that 
hour  we  started  ;  four  carts,  each  drawn  by  four  horses ;  our 
baggage  and  part  of  our  provender  went  off  on  camels  the 
night  before. 

Our  road,  for  some  fifteen  miles,  was  over  what  has  all  the 
appearance  of  having  once  been  the  bed  of  a  river,  and  was 
not  60  rough  as  it  might  have  been,  until  we  reached  the 
upper  end  of  it,  and  then  the  stones  were  so  large  that  I  felt 
it  was  better  to  be  on  foot  Here  there  is  a  temple,  a  mix- 
ture of  Taurish  and  Buddhist,  for  both  the  representatives  of 
those  religions  figured  upon  the  altar ;  the  former  on  horse- 
back. It  is  called  the  Daban  temple,  or  Kwan-loua-yah- 
meao;  the  priest  who  looks  after  it  has  turned  it  into  a 
public-house.  It  stands  5020  feet  above  Pekin,  and  about 
2020  feet  above  Ealgan.  We  were  four  hours  getting  to  it 
Here  we  lunched,  and  then  started  again;  our  road  now 
leading  to  the  N.  W.  out  of  the  bed  of  the  river,  but  still 
over  rising  ground. 

A  few  miles  more  brought  us  to  the  highest  point  yet 
reached,  5800  feet  above  Pekin.  Our  road  was  now  a  grad- 
ual descent,  and  at  about  9  p.il  stopped  at  a  youart  (tent), 


102         MONGOL  PRAYER— CHAXAR  TRIBES. 

close  to  which  was  another  temple,  and  there  we  passed  thti 
night ;  height  above  Pekin  5000  feet 

15^A. — Last  night  slept  in  our  carts,  when  the  horses  were 
changed  for  camels,  and  came  on  here.  We  have  now  cat 
all  connection  with  the  Chinese,  and  are  wholly  in  the  hands 
of  the  Mongols.  Some  cnltivation  by  the  Chinese  is  going 
on  where  we  now  are,  but  it  is  only  to  a  trifling  extent ; 
they  are  sowing  millet  and  ploughing  for  maize.  Komerous 
obons  or  moiinds  of  stones  we  have  passed  on  the  road. 
Pasture  very  scant  In  my  cart  temperature  62**,  wind  S. 
Many  droves  of  camels  about  us.  Started  at  2  p.m.,  travel- 
ling until  7  P.M.,  when  we  stopped  until  6  A.1C.,  continuing 
with  good  road  until  9.30,  when  we  pitched  our  tent  for  our 
midday  meal.  Passed  many  youarts  and  three  small  lakes. 
Up  early  this  morning  and  visited  an  obon  about  twelve  feet 
high,  with  fourteen  smaller  ones  in  a  line  on  each  side*  A 
pole  stuck  in  the  centre  of  each  with  a  small  flag  attached, 
upon  which  was  written  in  the  Mongol  tongue,  ^^  Oum  wah 
ni  batie ;  **  equivalent  to,  perhaps,  "  0  Lord,  have  mercy  upon 
us."  *  Saw  first  wild  goat,  a  snipe,  and  a  curlew.  Visited  a 
youart  and  had  a  drink  of  milk.  The  plain  smooth  and 
undulating.    Wind  N.E. ;  weather  pleasantly  warm. 

\^th — Left  at  2  p.m.,  and  travelled  until  7  p.m.  over  a 
capital  road  and  undulating  plain.  We  then  stopped,  and 
started  again  at  midnight;  pitched  our  tent  for  breakfast 
and  dinner  (in  one)  at  7.30  a.m.,  Sunday.  Temperature  56\ 
Passed  many  youarts.  This  morning  found  ourselves  among 
a  group  of  low  hills,  one  of  the  highest  marking  by  aneroid 
only  5700  feet  above  the  sea.  Had  a  two  hours'  walk ; 
herbage  very  short;  light  breeze  from  N.W.  The  rocks 
crop  out  invariably  on  the  tops  of  the  low  hills ;  a  good  deal 
appears  to  be  trap  or  igneous  rock :  not  a  tree  or  shrub  to 
be  seen  anywhere.  Swapped  a  bottle  for  a  bottle  of  milk. 
We  are  now  in  the  country  of  the  Chaxar  tribes. 

17^^. — Yesterday  we  were  on  foot  at  1.30  p.m.,  travelling 
until  8  P.M.  over  an  undulating  plain  and  good  road,  with 
low  hills  around  us.  Visited  a  youart  inhabited  by  a  Mon- 
gol and  his  wife  and  his  wife's  mother,  an  old  nun  of  eighty- 
seven  years  of  age.     There  were  two  young  children,  one  of 

*  See  '<  Journal  de  la  Sod^t^  Amstiqae,"  art  **  OboD,*'  by  Klaproth. 


OFFER  TO  SELL  A  CHILD— LAKE  BORO.       103 

which  the  parents  offered  to  sell  to  Mr  Grant ;  one  of  them 
is  a  Lama.  Gk)t  a  supply  of  milk  in  retnrn  for  some  empty 
bottles.  Our  present  encampment  is  5050  aboye  the  sea,  and 
called  Dzarmin  Ossov. 

l&A. — Moved  at  3  p.m.  yesterday,  stopped  at  10  p.m. 
Stony  undnlatory  road.  This  morning  away  at  3  a.m. 
Pitched  onr  encampment  for  breakfast  and  dinner  at  10  p.m. 
Weather  fine ;  strong  north  wind  blowing.  Temperature  75**; 
height  aboye  sea  4700  feet  Herbage  scanty,  but  some 
yonarts  and  few  homed  cattle  in  sight.  The  camels  have 
dnmk  twice  since  leaving  Kalgan  ;  they  had  nothing  to  eat 
when  we  encamped  last  night 

19^ — Bemained  encamped  until  nearly  5  p.m.  yesterday ; 
went  on  until  10  p.m.     There  was  no  feed  for  the  camels,  so 
that  when  we  halted  this  morning  at  9.30,  after  travelling 
only  four  and  a  half  hours,  they  were  ravenous,  and  would  not 
wait  to  be  unharnessed  before  they  began  to  feed.    Height 
of  Lake  Boro,  passed  last  evening,  4500  feet    A  sharp 
breeze  from  N.W.  blew  yesterday  afternoon,  lulled  during 
the  night,  and  has  freshened  up  again,  so  that  it  is  with  diffi- 
culty we  can  keep  our  tent  all  right     The  air  is  loaded  with 
dust,  which  is  anything   but  pleasant     Last  night, .how* 
ever,  with  a  moon  seven  days  old,  was  as  fine  as  any  I  have 
ever  seen.     Our  road,  for  some  time  yesterday  evening,  ran 
through  a  double  ridge  of  low  hills  over  sand.    We  then 
passed  an  extensive  obon  on  rising  ground,  accompanied  by 
twelve  smaller  ones.    Thirteen  seems  to  be  a  mystical  num- 
ber with  the  Mongols.     A  large  obon  is  usually,  if  not  always, 
accompanied  by  twelve  smaller  ones.     After  getting  away 
from  the  low  hills,  we  entered  upon  a  plain  or  steppe,  a  dead 
flat,  the  horizon  around  almost  unbroken.    A  very  good  road 
and  some  pasture  for  the  camels  where  we  now  are.     We 
passed  a  number  of  isolated  youarts,  some  flocks  of  goats 
and  sheep  and  a  few  horned  cattle.     Yesterday  afternoon  we 
passed  what  is  called  an  aieal  or  cluster  of  youarts. 

Dropped  yesterday  a  piece  of  Sycee  silver,  which  was 
picked  up  by  an  old  woman  (a  Mahometan),  who  with  her 
husband  and  daughters  happened  to  be  paying  us  a  visit  at 
the  time.  I  may  remark  here  that  these  were  the  only 
Mahometans  we  saw  in  Mongolia.     Whether  or  not  she  was 


104  MONGOLS  VERY  SUFEESUTmUS. 

%m\\  to  pick  it  up  I  am  not  quite  sisfL  Inn  vOErasm  it  is  she 
itniiusdiati^ljr  brought  it  to  Mr  Gxasu  anc  roc  a  brick  of  tea 
in  ntttirn  for  her  l^k  or  her  liaDesrr.  -vidcoipfcr  it  might 
havo  \mMu  Temperatnre  earlTtiuE  mamrig'Sg';  noon,  TS"" 
ill  ttiy  curt :  height  4300  feet 

I  iiftV6  Maid  that  the  Mongols  are  a  rerr  sigerKidoiis people; 
iiint  nvotiing  we  had  an  instance  of  it.  Oar  Lama  and  lus 
htiaditmii  came  to  our  tent,  and  expresBed  a  sotng  desire  to 
Icmvn  iiiunodiately  as  money  had  been  kia  koe,  a  circum- 
Hlniu'ti  to  which  they  attributed  the  roqgh  wind  then 
hUiwIuKi  tind  which  had  been  blowing  kmg  before  the  silver 
WHM  dropped  ;  but  the  MoDgols  are  not,  aaj  more  than  other 
p(MiplO|  v(Ty  logical  in  their  superstitions,  besides  which,  the 
Hilvi^r  hiul  been  found  again,  bat  this  dreomstaDoe  did  not 
woigh  with  the  Mongols. 

Wth. — Wo  remained  at  our  early  encampment  yesterday 
until  fi  J'.M.  Started  and  weot  on  again  nntU  11  p.]f.  We 
then  iialtetl  for  the  night,  and  did  notmoTe  until  4.30.  It 
Im  now  10.30  a.m.,  and  we  have  just  encamped.  We  had  wind 
and  (liiHt  during  tlie  day,  but  fine,  and  moonlight  at  night 
TaMMod  Noveral  lakes  yesterday  and  last  night,  of  larger 
dinift(iHionri  than  any  before  seen.  Many  sand  monnds, 
nioHtly  covered  with  coarse  gross  and  reeds.  Isolated 
yoiiartH  in  Hight;  many  camels  and  bullock-carta  passing 
alotiK  towards  Urga  and  Kiachta.  Temperature,  5  a.il, 
48" ;  height  3000  feet. 

2l/»/,  Friday. — Left  our  morning's  encampment  yesterday 
at  is  P.M.  The  Mongols  bought  a  sheep  yesterday,  and 
wens  all  day  eating  it,  an  operation  that  prevented  us 
getting  away  earlier  than  6  p.m.  Our  road  was  rough 
during  tlio  night  At  8  a.m.  we  passed  the  only  mile- 
stone in  Mongolia,  at  least  the  only  one  on  our  route,  1000 
le  from  Pckin.  It  is  a  piece  of  limestone  two  feet  by 
eighteen  inches,  and  six  inches  thick,  with  ^^  a  thousand 
le  from  Pekin"  inscribed  upon  it  in  Chinese  characters; 
the  le  is  about  the  third  of  a  mile.  The  Mongola  call 
the  place  "Mingen,"  which  means  1000.  Height  4400 
feet ;  temperature  at  noon  80**,  and  7  A.M.  68^  Our  en- 
campment is  4600  feet,  in  a  hollow  among  the  hills,  with  a 
well  of  good  water,  and  a  little  green  grass.     Half-a-dozen 


SALT  LAKE,  IREN— DESERT  OF  GOBL         105 

drops  of  rain  fell  last  night  for  the  first  time  since  we  left 
Kalgan.  Saw  to-day  a  herd  pf  antelopes  feeding  with  the 
cows  of  a  youart  close  by.    Hoad  sandy  since  daylight 

22d^  Saturday.  —  Remained  until  7  p.m.  last  night, 
travelled  over  a  very  even  road  until  11  p.m.,  and  then 
stopped  for  the  night  This  morning,  5  A.M.,  away,  and 
kept  on  till  noon  over  a  barren  flat  waste.  We  are  now 
encamped  near  two  wells,  but  there  is  nothing  to  eat  for  the 
camels.  Temperature  early  this  morning  50** ;  noon,  60*" : 
height  4000  feet  Bought  a  sheep  yesterday  for  two  taels 
or  twelve  shillings.  This  place  is  called  Borulgen  Well. 
One  of  the  wheels  of  my  carriage  is  tumbling  to  pieces, 
and  I  foresee  I  shall  have  to  mount  a  camel  before  long. 

23€/,  Sunday. — Started  at  6  p.m.  yesterday,  and  travelled 
until  10  P.M.  over  a  gravelly  plain,  where  we  stopped  for  the 
night,  near  the  Salt  Lake,  Iren ;  height  aSOO  feet  At  5 
jk.M.  we  were  moving,  and  at  10.30  a.m.  stopped  where  we 
now  are,  a  barren  waste,  some  low  hills  showing  themselves 
in  the  distance.  Temperature,  6  A.M.,  50**;  noon,  60°  :  height 
3600  feet  Weather  clear  and  bright  Very  few  youarts 
to  be  seen  during  the  past  two  days. 

24rt. — Stopped  here  at  9.30  a.m.  In  the  course  of  the  day 
six  of  our  camels  have  either  strayed  away  or  been  stolen, 
which  has  obliged  us  to  remain  here  all  day  and  all  night 
seeking  for  them.  Fortunately  for  us,  we  have  in  our  caravan 
twenty  camels,  laden  with  brick-tea,  and  from  this  source,  if 
needs  be,  we  shall  be  supplied  with  camels,  and  the  brick- 
tea  will  be  left  to  follow.  7.30  a.m.,  and  we  are  making 
preparations  for  a  start ;  temperature  46^  We  are  now  in 
the  great  Desert  of  Gk)bi,  or  Shamo,  where  there  is  next  to 
nothing  for  the  camels  to  eat ;  we  have  been  in  it  for  two  days, 
and  it  will  be  two  days  more  before  we  get  out  of  it  It  is 
an  arid  gravelly  plain,  somewhat  undulating,  with  sandhills 
here  and  there — evidently,  from  what  I  learn,  the  most 
inhospitable  part  of  the  whole  road.  The  camels  have  been 
found.  At  4  P.M.  we  halted  where  we  now  are,  having 
encountered  a  good  deal  of  rough  road.  Here  the  aneroid 
marked  3750  feet ;  the  Salt  Lake  of  Iren  3450  feet  Tem- 
perature early  in  morning  46"" ;  noon,  68^ 

25^^ — Left  our  dinner  camping-ground  at  6  p.m.  yester- 


io6  KHALKHAS  MONGOLS. 

dajand  halted  at  midniglit,  remaining  nntil  5.30  this  moni« 
ing.  Since  then  we  have  been  coming  over  a  rough  road 
running  in  great  part  among  the  hills,  from  the  crown  of 
which  granite  crops  out  in  many  places.  This  is  a  thorough 
desert,  though  fortunately  water  is  found  in  places  at  a 
depth  of  about  twelve  feet,  as  it  is  everywhere  in  the  plains 
of  Mongolia.  Temperature,  6  p.m.,  50**;  noon,  70*.  Halted 
here  at  1.30  p.m.  A  few  half-starved  camels  and  some 
horned  cattle  round  about  us,  picking  up  enough  grass  just 
to  keep  them  alive. 

2Qth. — We  left  our  dinner  camping-ground  yesterday  at 
6  P.M.  and  travelled  until  10  p.m.  Bested  where  there 
was  some  dry  grass  for  the  camels  to  pick  at  until  four 
in  the  morning,  when  we  got  on  the  road  again  in  the 
midst  of  a  sharp  but  short  dust-storm.  The  first  part  of 
the  day's  march  was  a  level  arid  plain,  over  any  part  of 
which  for  many  miles  on  either  side  we  might  have  chosen 
our  road.  The  moon  was  at  the  full  and  the  night  quit« 
still,  60  we  enjoyed  it  by  walking  by  the  side  of  the  carts  all 
the  way  from  our  first  to  our  second  resting-place.  Dnriug 
the  morning  we  got  into  broken  ground  among  low  hills,  all 
very  arid,  and  we  are  now  encamped  on  the  northern  edge  of 
the  Desert  of  Gobi,  just  entering  on  the  Khalkhas  Mongol 
territory.  This  morning  we  have  passed  some  trees  growing 
in  a  sheltered  nook  among  the  hills,  a  mile  from  the 
road.  Observed  some  coarse  red  granite  cropping  out  of 
the  tops  of  mounds  all  over  the  plain.  A  herd  of  yomsh 
in  sight.  No  youart  to  be  seen  to-day.  In  my  wanderings 
on  foot  (and  I  generally  walk  half-a-dozen  hours  every  day) 
I  pick  up  all  the  bits  of  wood  I  can  find,  and  when  we  come 
to  a  standstill  I  turn  them  into  nails,  with  which  I  have 
now  for  several  days  doctored  the  wheels  of  my  cart,  and  so  far 
have  prevented  a  breakdown.  Nevertheless  they  are  now  very 
shaky.  Yesterday  we  left  the  remainder  of  our  brick-tea 
cargo  behind,  and  we  are  now  travelling  with  a  reduced 
caravan,  consisting  of  twenty-five  camels  laden  with  our  own 
loggage  and  stores,  and  drawing  the  four  carts.  In  this 
way  we  shall,  I  hope,  get  faster  over  the  ground.  Tempera- 
ture at  noon  72°.  Height  of  this  resting-place  about  4200 
feet 


HALF'  WAY  BETWEEN  KALGAN  AND  URGA.     107 

Vlilu — ^We  left  onp  dining-place  yesterday  at  6  p.m.,  and 
trayelled  until  1.30  in  the  morning  over  a  very  good  road. 
At  first  we  passed  through  a  depression,  which  has  been 
designated  as  a  defile  opening  out  on  an  extensive  plain : 
then  again  we  got  among  hills,  the  road  always  good  and 
the  scenery  somewhat  picturesque — at  any  rate  a  great 
change  from  what  we  had  been  passing  over  during  the 
preyious  part  of  our  journey.  The  night  very  fine,  the  moon 
having  risen  as  the  sun  went  down  in  a  gloriously  illumin- 
ated horizon.  At  five  this  morning  we  were  again  on  the 
roady  very  rough  in  places,  and  arid  and  sandy  everywhere. 
We  reached  Oude  or  XJde  at  1.80  p.m.,  where  we  were 
surrounded  by  youarts  and  extensive  flocks  and  herds :  how 
these  animals  manage  to  find  food  here  is  a  mystery ;  but 
they  are  accustomed  at  this  season  of  the  year  to  hard 
living.  This  place  is  half-way  between  Kalgan  and  Urga. 
The  Russians  have  a  post  here ;  one  man  in  a  youart.  Tem- 
perature at  6  A.M.  48'';  noon,  1^  \  height  where  we  are 
encamped  4100  feet.  Last  evening  we  were  travelling  again 
at  six,  and  we  stopped  at  about  eleven.  At  6.30  a.m.  on  th6 
28th  we  were  again  under  weigh,  and  at  10.30  we  were  again 
at  anchor.  Our  camels  are  a  good  deal  the  worse  for  what 
they  have  done,  and  no  wonder.  Last  night  they  had 
noUiing  to  eat,  and  when  turned  loose  on  the  plain  they 
find  very  little  indeed.  How  they  get  along  is  a  mystery 
to  me,  heavily  laden  as  they  are,  and  so  badly  fed. 
After  ascending  a  low  hill  last  night,  our  road  lay  over  a 
Tery  extensive  and  arid  plain,  and  so  it  lasted  all  night. 
This  morning  we  came  to  a  rocky  hill,  from  it  we  descended 
into  a  barren  sandy  plain^  where  we  are  now  encamped.  We 
have  been  troubled  with  many  visitors  to-day.  The  Mon- 
gols are  all  beggars;  whether  they  have  the  blue  stone 
button  on  the  top  of  their  cap  which  denotes  hereditary 
dignity,  or  only  the  blue  glass  button  which  tells  of  mush- 
room dignity,  or  no  button  at  all,  they  are  all  beggars,  and  at 
times  very  troublesome  ones.  Thermometer  at  6  a.m.  SO"" ; 
noon,  74** :  height  of  our  encampment  3900  feet 

2%A. — ^At  1  A.M.  yesterday  we  moved  on  to  Thagan  Tugarick, 
and  at  five  in  the  afternoon  we  were  saluted  with  the  worst 
dust-storm  we  have  experienced  on  the  whole  journey.     It 


xo8  TUGARICK—TARACHI. 

came  from  the  S.E.,  and  lasted  for  an  hour.  Mr  Michie 
speaks  of  a  well-watered  plain  at  Tagarick.  There  is  nothing 
but  well-water  here  now,  and  the  plam  at  present  is  as  g^reat 
a  desert  as  Gobi  itself.  We  left  it  at  midnight,  and  stopped 
again  for  a  couple  of  hours  at  5  A.M.,  and  at  7  A.1L  we  were 
o£f  again  over  a  plain ,  arid  enough,  but  level  as  a  bowlings 
green,  and  free  from  big  stones  for  manj  miles.  We  then 
came  to  undulations,  with  a  gradual  descent,  until  we  reached 
a  well  of  good  water,  a  few  hundred  yards  from  whidi  we 
encamped  at  noon.  The  well  stands  3600  feet  above  the 
sea.  Temperature  at  noon  in  my  cart  82"" ;  a  fresh  breeze 
blowing  from  the  westward.  We  have  just  passed  a  string 
of  fifty  Chinese  carts  going  towards  Urga.  Last  evening 
we  patched  up  the  wheels  of  my  cart,  and  it  has  come  on 
wonderfully  well  during  the  night ;  but  I  can  no  longer  call 
them  my  wheels,  for  mine  have  been  shifted  to  Mr  Grant^s 
cart,  which  is  much  lighter,  whilst  I  have  taken  his  wheels, 
whose  cart  is  not  so  good  in  the  body  as  mine.  In  fact,  the 
bad  wheels  have  been  attached  to  the  bad  body,  ready  to  be 
abandoned  if  need  be.     This  plain  is  called  Tarachi  (well). 

30^ — Left  our  dinner-encampment  at  6  p.m.  and  travelled 
until  11  P.M.  Started  again  after  midnight,  and  continued 
until  4.30  A.M. ;  then  we  changed  almost  all  our  camels  for 
fresh  ones,  from  the  establishment  of  our  Lama,  situated 
some  three  or  four  miles  o£f  the  line  of  road.  The  road 
during  the  night  and  this  morning  has  been  so  rough  that 
my  cart-wheels  have  been  finished  up  by  it,  and  now  I  shall 
have  to  take  to  a  camel ;  the  rocky  ridges  of  granite  and 
sandstone  over  which  we  have  had  to  pass  have  been  more 
than  the  wheels  were  equal  to:  no  pasture,  deep  sand 
occasionally. 

3l5^. — Yesterday  we  passed  an  extensive  plain  covered 
with  flint  pebbles,  and  experienced  a  few  short  but  sharp 
dust-storms.  At  a  large  well  just  passed,  the  height  given 
by  the  aneroid  was  3900  feet ;  where  we  are  now  encamped 
it  stands  at  4100.  Temperature  early  this  morning  66^; 
noon,  84®  in  my  cart  Left  our  camping-ground  of  yester- 
day at  7  P.M.  and  travelled  until  2  a.m.  I  am  now  doing 
the  work  on  a  pony,  and  last  night's  ride  gave  me  an  appetite 
for  a  couple  of  hours'  sleep,  which  I  got  in  the  open  this 


ANCIENT  FORT-^DARKIN  MOUNTAIN.         109 

morning  after  coming  to  a  halt,  before  starting  again  at 
5  A.1C  We  have  been  here  since  noon.  Height  of  a  well 
of  good  water  €850  feet,  which  we  passed  a  mile  from  this. 
Boad  pretty  good,  running  generally  among  low  hills,  with 
a  few  miles  of  dead  plain  occasionally.  Nothing  yet  for  the 
camels  to  eat  Temperature  in  the  shade  85^ ;  noon,  in  the 
son,  98^.     Some  higher  hills  in  the  distance. 

June  \9t.  —  Left  our  dining-encampment  yesterday  at 
4  Pjc.y  and  travelled  until  3  a.m.  over  a  rough  road  the 
greater  part  of  the  way.  Soon  after  leaying  the  encampment 
we  got  into  what  might  be  called  a  hilly  country,  and  tra- 
velled through  a  short  but  pretty  pass,  with  a  well  in  the 
centre,  but  not  good  water.  The  hills  on  either  side  were 
perhaps  150  feet  high,  and  green^  but  the  pasture  was  very 
scanty.  They  were  covered  with  sheep  and  horned  cattle, 
and  100  ponies,  at  least,  were  busy  at  the  well  as  we 
passed  through,  without  fincUng  fault  with  the  water.  Yisited 
a  youart  and  got  some  tea  and  milk ;  this  is  one  advantage 
derived  from  doing  the  journey  on  horseback.  Picked  up  a 
collection  of  pebbles,  with  which  the  road  all  along  here  is 
covered.  Visited  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  fort  built  of  stone, 
bat  we  could  see  very  little  of  it,  as  it  was  almost  dark 
when  we  came  upon  it.  At  5  a.  n.  we  were  again  on  the 
road,  and  at  1  p.k.  halted.  Our  road  during  the  morning 
has  been  over  an  undulating  country,  looking  green  pretty 
generally.  Our  camels  were  allowed  to  eat  what  they  could 
pi^  np  last  night  Slept  very  soundly  in  the  open  during 
the  three  hours  we  remained  at  our  night  or  rather  morning 
encampment ;  and  as  I  mounted  I  made  for  a  youart,  and 
there  had  some  tea.    Height  of  encampment  nearly  5000 

feet 

2d. — Left  yesterday's  encampment  at  5  p.m.  and  travelled 
mitil  1.30  A.M.,  when  darkness  and  the  difficulties  of  the  road 
obliged  us  to  stop.  Very  dark.  Some  rain ;  fortunately  I 
was  under  cover.  At  5  A.M.  we  were  off  again,  and  stopped 
where  we  now  are  at  noon.  The  road  all  this  morning  has 
been  excellent,  over  an  undulating  and  green  plain^  though 
covered  with  very  scant  pasture;  still  it  pleases  the  eye. 
Passed  the  Darkin  Mountain,  which  may  be  1000  feet 
above  the  plain,  and  also  a  small  stream  coming  from  it 


110  CATTLE  ABOUND  ON  THE  STEPPE. 

It  was  quite  refreshing  to  see  this  stream  of  water,  though 
Yery  tiny.  Weather  fine  again.  Wind  N.N.W.  Youarts 
and  cattle  everywhere. 

3dl— Yesterday  we  raised  our  encampment  at  5  p.k.)  and 
pushed  on  across  one  of  the  many  extensive  steppes  covered  with 
scant  pasture,  until  3.30  iuH.  this  morning,  when  we  stopped  for 
two  hours  and  a  half,  and  at  6  a.m.  were  off  again,  and 
encamped  where  we  now  are  at  a  few  minutes  after  2  p.x., 
having  travelled  for  the  last  two  hours  under  rain.  Last 
nighty  too,  we  had  a  good  deal  of  rain ;  fortunately  I  was 
under  cover  in  a  cart  This  is  a  vast  steppe  of  undulating 
ground  upon  which  we  are  now  encamped,  green  all  over, 
with  low  hills  in  the  distance.  Cattle  abound,  and  youarts 
are  dotted  about  all  around  us.  The  wind  has  been  blowing 
to-day  from  N.N.W.  It  is  now  steady  from  north.  Height 
of  encampment  5150  feet;  temperature  60^ 

Ath. — Got  away  from  our  encampment  of  yesterday  at 
5.30  P.M.,  and  travelled  until  nearly  four  this  morning  over 
an  undulating  country  and  good  road  generally,  though  bad 
in  places.  One  pass  was  picturesque.  Height  of  the  hill 
on  one  side  5400  feet,  and  somewhat  higher  on  the  other. 
Country  covered  with  better  pasture.  Slept  last  night  in 
the  open  on  a  hill  5400  feet  high,  and  started  again  at  5.30 
A.M.,  and  reached  this  ground,  a  vast  plain  surrounded  by 
hills,  at  11.30  a.m.  A  hoarfrost  last  night — the  first  I  have 
experienced  in  Mongolia.  Height  of  encampment  5200  feet 

5th. — ^At  5  P.M.  we  started  from  our  resting-place,  and 
travelled  all  night,  or  until  8  A.M.  next  day,  having  in  the 
early  morn  stopped  at  a  youart  and  knocked  up  a  good 
woman  who  was  noseless;  she  went  to  work  at  once  and 
gave  us  some  tea.  Leaving  this  good  Samaritan,  we  kept 
moving  on  imtil  8  A.M.,  when  we  stopped  to  give  our 
ponies  and  camels  a  feed,  and  we  ourselves  went  into  a 
youart  hard  by  and  breakfasted  off  our  own  food,  aided  by 
some  good  tea  and  clotted  milk  furnished  by  the  hospitable 
Mongol  woman,  the  mistress  of  the  house. 

The  people  here  were  well-to-do.  The  old  man  of  the  family 
treated  us  to  prayers.  He  opened  a  box  and  took  from  it  a 
dozen  or  more  manuscript  prayers,  written  each  of  them  on 
strips  of  paper  two  feet  long  by  six  inches  wide.     He  then 


PR  A  YING-MA  CHINES--  URGA.  1 1  x 

took    two   prayiDg-machines  (boorda)  from   the   household 
altar,  and  placing  them  on  a  stool  before  him,  he  set  them 
agoing,   and  commenced   saying   his   prayers  aloud.      He 
listened  during  prayer-time  to  the  conversation  going  on, 
and  occasionally  mixed  in  it  or  joined  in  a  laugh,  and  then 
again  went  on  praying,  aud  as  the  machines  went  down  he 
wound  them  up  afresh.     This  man  was  a  Lama  and  a  man- 
darin, two  facts  signified  by  a  small  flag  flying  on  a  staff  at 
the  end  of  the  youart,  and  three  mandarins'  caps  on  a  pole 
keeping  the  flag   company.      The  youart  was    situated   in 
park-like,  undulating  ground,  but  not  a  tree  near  it.    We 
were  again  in  the  saddle  at  10  a.  m.,  at  least  I  was,  for  my 
companions  were  in  their  carts  ;  aud  we  travelled  until  5 
P.M.  over  a  hilly  country  with  diversified  scenery,  but  hardly 
mountainous,  when  we  reached  the  river  Tolla,  and  crossed 
it  without  difficulty,  and  in  an  hour  afterwards  we  were  in  Mr 
Grant's  youart  at  Urga.    At  the  place  we  started  from  on 
Friday  evening  we  left  several  of  our  camels,  merely  taking 
with  us  two  camels  with  our  personal  luggage,  and  one  with 
our  provisions  ;  two  of  us  being  mounted  on  camels,  one  on 
a  pony,  and  Mr  Grant  continuing  in  his  cart. 

CM. — Urga.  Here  I  got  a  night's  rest,  and  this  morning 
feel  fresh  and  ready  for  a  start  again.  Urga  may  be  said  to 
consist  of  three  separate  places.  The  first  is  about  two  miles 
from  the  Tolla,  called  Maimachin,  the  buying  and  selling 
city,  as  the  word  denotes,  or  place  of  commerce.  A  good 
mile  beyond  is  Urga  proper,  and  further  on  still,  some  ex- 
tensive erections,  the  dwellings  of  the  Lamas,  some  2000  of 
whom,  they  tell  me,  are  always  here,  and  at  times  the  number 
gathered  together  on  particular  occasions  may  amount  to 
30,000.  Urga  is  the  headquarters  of  the  Lamas  in  Mon- 
golia. They  swarm  around  you  as  you  enter  Urga,  indeed 
almost  mob  you,  and  to  all  appearance  are  an  idle,  dirty  set 
of  all  ages,  dressed  in  their  distinctive  colours,  some  in  red 
cloaks  and  others  in  yellow,  according  to  their  position  in 
the  Church.  The  Russian  consul  has  a  comfortable  house, 
situated  between  Maimachin  and  Urga  proper ;  but  besides 
this  bmlding  and  the  palace  of  the  Dalai- Lama,  and  buildings 
attached  thereto,  neither  Maimachin  nor  Urga  contains  any 
but  youarts,  and  low,  dirty  wooden  houses.    All  three  places 


112  LAMAS— OBTAIN  A  PRAYING-BOX. 

■ 

are  situated  in  a  stony  plain,  with  little  or  rather  no  cnltiva- 
tion,  and  surrounded  by  hills  in  the  distance,  some  of  them 
pretty  well  clothed  with  fir  and  birch ;  a  pleasing  contrast  to 
the  bare  hills  and  plains  of  Mongolia  we  have  been  travelling 
over.  Here  I  succeeded,  through  our  Lama's  disciple,  in  obtain* 
ing  a  hoorda  or  praying-box.  The  owner  would  not  sell  or 
name  a  price  for  it :  it  belonged  to  God,  he  said,  and  could  not 
be  sold.  In  exchange  for  it,  however,  he  accepted  a  brick  of 
tea.  The  population  of  Urga  is  Chinese  and  Mongol,  with  a 
few  Russians.  Here  we  found  Mr  Grant's  travelling-carriage 
sent  to  meet  him  from  Kiachta.  I  proceeded  on  a  iresh 
pony,  Mr  Grant  and  his  brother  in  the  carriage,  a  rough 
vehicle  with  wooden  springs,  drawn  by  three  horses. 

At  noon  on  the  6th  we  left  Urga,  and  passed  rapidly 
over  the  first  twenty  miles  of  our  journey;  a  good  road, 
and  nearly  flat  all  the  way,  the  slopes  on  both  sides 
being  well  covered  with  fir  and  birclu  Here  I  met  with  an 
accident  in  mounting  my  skittish  pony.  The  fellow  started 
o£f  before  I  could  get  into  the  saddle,  and  the  consequence  to 
me  was  a  fall,  which  shook  me  so  severely  that  after  riding 
a  few  miles  further,  I  was  glad  to  take  a  seat  in  the  carriage 
for  the  remainder  of  the  journey  to  Kiachta.  Here,  too,  our 
other  troubles  began :  we  had  not  proceeded  many  miles, 
when  in  crossing  a  low  swampy  place  we  stuck  fast  in  the 
mud,  and  it  was  only  after  six  hours*  continued  exertions, 
assisted  by  bullocks,  that  we  succeeded  in  drawing  the  car- 
riage on  to  firm  ground.  It  was  now  1  A.1I.,  so  we  re- 
mained where  we  were  until  daylight  on  7th;  and  after 
lighting  a  fire  and  getting  some  tea,  which  we  all  much 
needed,  moved  on  again.  At  noon  we  overtook  Mr  Grant, 
and  somewhat  later  stopped  for  a  couple  of  hours,  lighted 
a  fire  and  had  something  to  eat,  and  then  pushed  on  until 
eleven  o'clock,  and  remained  there  until  10  a.k.  next  day, 
the  weather  being  very  wet  and  stormy.  We  got  oflF,  how- 
ever, at  that  hour,  and  had  not  proceeded  many  miles  when 
we  again  stuck  in  the  mud.  At  this  time  I  was  suffering 
a  good  deal,  the  result  of  the  fall  from  the  pony,  so  I  re- 
mained in  the  carriage,  whilst  the  two  Mr  Grants  got  out 
to  seek  for  help  at  a  Chinese  encampment  hard  by.  We  were 
occupied  for  five  hours  in  procuring  bullocks  and  extricating 


jiANKS  OF  THE  IRO—KIACHTA.  113 

the  carriage  from  the  swamp^  and  when  the  bnllocks  had  drawn 
it  out,  it  capsized  with  me  in  it,  and  became  pretty  nearly 
buried  in  the  mnd«  I  was  some  minutes  before  I  could  clear 
myself  from  the  contents  of  the  carriage,  which  had  all  fallen 
upon  me,  but  when  I  did  so,  I  found  myself  nothing  the 
worse.  After  moving  on  until  evening,  we  again  met 
with  a  stoppage  in  passing  through  an  insignificant  stream 
that  crossed  our  path.  The  horses,  in  fact,  were  a  good  deal 
used  up,  and  it  was  only  after  a  delay  of  a  couple  of  hours 
that  we  succeeded  in  reaching  dry  land ;  so,  as  night  was 
i^proaching,  we  took  up  our  quarters  in  a  youart,  and 
remained  there  until  morning,  when  we  left  early,  and  at 
8  A.1L  we  were  on  the  banks  of  the  Iro,  which  we  had 
to  pass  by  placing  the  carriage  across  three  hoUowed-out 
logs ;  in  this  way  we  reached  the  opposite  bank,  the  horses 
being  passed  over  at  the  same  time.  We  were  detained  here 
two  hours,  so  many  bullock-carts  were  there  to  get  across 
before  our  turn  came.  The  whole  place  was  alive  with  cattle 
passing,  and  the  scene  was  further  enlivened  by  a  fight 
between  two  Mongols,  in  which  Mr  Grant  attempted  to 
interfere,  and  for  his  pains  had  his  stick  taken  from  him  by 
one  of  the  infuriated  pugilists,  and  narrowly  escaped  rough 
usage  at  his  hands — the  usual  result  for  those  who  meddle 
in  other  people's  quarrels.  The  Iro  passed,  we  lost  no  time 
in  harnessing  the  horses,  in  hopes  that  we  might  arrive 
by  the  evening  at  Kiachta.  The  road  was  somewhat  hilly, 
bat  nothing  of  consequence,  unless  for  tired  horses  such  as 
oars ;  and  so  it  was  that,  after  every  effort  to  push  on,  we 
were  obliged  to  stop  before  dark,  and  turn  our  horses  out  to 
feed  for  a  couple  of  hours,  when  within  about  fifteen  miles 
of  Kiachta.  We  started  again  at  midnight,  the  road  very 
heavy  sand,  and  moved  on  very  slowly  and  with  difficulty 
until  about  3  A.M.,  when  we  came  to  a  full  stop  in  the 
sand.  Here  we  remained  until  daylight,  when  we  found 
ourselves  only  some  three  or  four  miles  from  Kiachta,  and 
which  we  reached  at  7  a.m.  on  the  11th,  and  through  Mr 
Grant's  kindness  I  was  at  once  installed  in  comfortable 
qoarters.  Mr  G.,  accompanied  by  his  own  baggage  and 
mine,  did  not  arrive  until  about  four  hours  afterwards. 
He  too  had  met  with  delay,  one  of  his  two  camels  having 


114  TELEGRAM  TO  ENGLAND-^DINNER  PARTY. 

died  on  the  road.  Maimatchln  was  first  come  to,  for  there 
is  a  Maimatchin  here  as  well  as  at  Urga,  and  then  Ei- 
achta,  a  hit  of  neutral  ground  dividing  the  Chinese  from  the 
Russian  town.  We  passed  on  to  Troitkosarfsk,  where  Hr 
Grant  resides,  and  where  the  end  and  station  of  the 
electric  wire  from  St  Petershurg  is  situated,  the  distance 
to  the  capital  of  Russia  &om  where  we  now  are  being  6200 
versts,  or  about  4150  miles.  From  Urga  to  Eiachta  is  176 
miles. 

\Wi. — On  the  12th  sent  a  telegram  to  England;  twenty 
words  or  under  cost  seven  rubles  or  twenty  shillings — ^not 
dear  for  a  distance  of  close  upon,  or  rather  over,  4100  miles. 
At  dinner  yesterday  we  had  several  of  the  Eiachta  cele- 
brities. These  gentlemen  arrived  an  hour  or  two  before 
dinner,  and  immediately  sat  down  to  play  whist,  a  favourite 
amusement.  At  dinner  it  was  amusing  to  observe  them ; 
thoy  hol]>eii  themselves  from  the  dishes  with  their  own  knives 
and  forks,  poked  their  own  knives  into  the  mustard-pot, 
though  there  was  a  spoon  of  which  they  might  have  made  use. 
Of  Oinirso  they  eat  with  their  knives,  as  most  foreigners  do. 
Tlioy  showed  very  little  courtesy  to  those  about  them,  and 
when  the  dinner  was  finished,  each  man  on  rising  shook  Mr 
Qrant  by  the  hand,  and  thanked  him  for  the  good  dinner 
ho  had  pvou  them.  This  custom  is  pretty  general  all 
tlmniirh  Russia*  One  gentleman  who  dined  with  us  the 
dav  bofow  vostorilav,  an  oflicer  in  the  armv,  who  had  lost  a 
loiT  at  the  Alma^  and  who«  by-the-by,  said  (he  speaks  a  little 
Knirli^h^  that  ho  thnv  times  charged  the  Highlanders,  aud 
that  on  oaoh  occasion  thoy  had  given  way  at  the  point  of  the 
IviyoiuM*  and  funhor*  that  the  only  troops  we  had  at  the 
Alma  worth  anything  were  the  Rifies. — ^this  gentleman 
linii^hoil  up  by  licking  his  plate  Mongol  fashion.  I  would 
r.ot  in^ir.;iato  that  tho!>iO  Russian  employes  are  willingly  or 
ir.tor.nonaViy  nr.svnnoons  to  strangers;  on  the  contrary, 
they  have  all  of  thorn  without  exception  given  ns  every 
a^i$tar.oo  wo  oor^ld  dosiro^  and  behaved  to  ns  in  the  kindest 
niannoT  jv^ibV*  What  1  issean  is  that.,  to  a  weU-bied  Eng- 
lis^hn-jan  in  n-jannors^  their  bohavioxir  at  the  dinner^table 
appoars  so  <nrrrY,  that  it  wo!C:d  «iOom  to  be  nnoourteons  to 
tbiMio  aKoii  thos: :  bat  nothing  of  this  sort  is  intended. 


COSSACK  CAMPING-GROUND.  115 

Immediately  after  dinner  our  friends  resumed  their  seats  at 
cards,  and  were  still  playing  when  I  returned  to  my  lodgings. 
It  would  indeed  seem  that  card-playing  and  drinking  porter 
and  champagne  are  the  principal  modes  of  occupation  in 
this  remote  Russian  town. 

IQth. — Kiachta,  by  which  I  mean  Kiachta  proper,  which 
was  nearly  all  destroyed  by  fire  a  year  or  two  ago,  contains 
very  few  inhabitants.  The  two  together,  Kiachta  and 
Troitkosarfsk,  have  a  population  of  about  6000  souls,  princi- 
pally Siberian  Russians,  many  of  whom  are  the  descendants 
of  exiles.  Few  if  any  exiles  from  Russia  find  their  way  to 
Kiachta,  which  is  situated  some  250  or  260  versts  out  of  the 
main  line  of  road  from  Moscow  to  Irkutsk  and  the  Amoor. 
The  town  was  established,  and  is  exclusively  the  depot,  for 
the  trade  between  Russia  and  China.  A  large  business  in 
teas  is  of  course  done,  and  there  are  many  very  wealthy 
merchants  residing  here,  connected,  some  of  them,  with  the 
working  of  the  gold  mines  in  this  part  of  Siberia,  situated 
some  300  versts  from  Kiachta.  The  temperature  has 
ranged  in  the  shade  whilst  I  have  been  here  from  60""  to  70"", 
a  pleasant  temperature.  A  little  rain  has  fallen,  and  we 
have  had  some  thunder  and  lightning,  but  the  weather  has 
been  generally  fine. 

19^ — The  day  before  yesterday  we  went  with  Mr  Grant 
to  bis  conntry-house,  some  sixteen  or  seventeen  miles  from 
Kiachta,  on  the  river  Chikoy,  a  tributary  of  the  Selenga, 
returning  yesterday.  The  Chikoy  is  deep  and  rapid,  and  a 
hundred  yards  broad  in  front  of  Mr  Grant's  house.  At 
times  it  becomes  much  more  imposing  than  it  is  at  present,  and 
indeed  seldom  contains  less  water.  The  drive  from  Kiachta 
was  over  sandy  downs,  partly  in  Mongolia^  and  partly  in 
Siberia.  We  passed  on  the  way  a  double  line  of  wooden  huts, 
somewhat  similar  in  outside  appearance  to  those  at  Alder- 
shot,  built  on  the  camping-ground  of  the  Cossacks,  where 
they  assemble  for  periodical  inspection.  The  huts  are  empty 
at  present,  but  a  gathering  of  the  Cossacks  is  soon  to  take 
place. 

The  downs  are  fairly  covered  with  pasture.  A  good  many 
camels  with  bare  hides — for  the  camel  sheds  its  coat  every 
year — and  a  sprinkling  of  horned  cattle  and  sheep,  seemed  to 


ii6  COUNTRY  ABOUT  KIACHTA. 

be  enjoying  the  feed.  The  situation  of  Mr  Grant's  log- 
house  is  well  chosen.  It  stands  on  high  ground,  some,  sixtj 
or  seventy  feet  above  the  Chikoy,  which  is  quite  close,  and 
is  seen  as  it  winds  through  the  valley  in  perhaps  a  dozen 
different  places.  The  views  from  the  verandah  of  the  log- 
house  is  charming;  the  tortuous  Chikoy  flowing  rapidly 
past  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  or  high  ground  upon  which  the 
house  is  built,  the  extensive  valley  through  which  it  winds, 
and  the  hills  bordering  the  valley  at  no  great  distance, 
together  form  a  pretty  picture.  The  strip  of  level  land  that 
runs  along  by  the  river-side  in  parts  forms  nice  green  fields, 
and  again  is  thickly  sprinkled  with  trees  and  shrubs,  with 
a  fair  coating  of  flowers ;  the  wild  rose  everywhere,  the  lily 
of  the  valley,  the  anemone,  the  scabius,  the  siempre  vivens, 
and  other  wild  flowers,  growing  in  profusion.  The  willow, 
the  alder,  and  the  crab-apple  are  among  the  trees  which  I 
noticed.  Mr  Grant  bought  the  lease  of  this  place  only  last 
year  for  seventy  years  for  400  rubles,  and  it  cost  him 
another  hundred  rubles  to  make  it  habitable.  The  dwelling- 
houses,  with  outhouses,  stand  in  a  good  large  compound, 
besides  which  he  has  many  acres  fenced  in  for  his  cows  and 
horses.  He  will  occupy  it  with  his  family  for  some  four 
months  during  summer.  May  to  September,  and  it  is  really 
a  charming  place.  Round  about  it  are  growing  a  good 
sprinkling  of  firs,  some  of  them  from  eighteen  inches  to  two 
feet  in  diameter,  which  gives  the  ground  somewhat  the 
appearance  of  an  English  park.  The  reality  of  all  this  is 
very  wide  indeed  fi-om  the  notion  inspired  at  home  by  the 
mention  of  Siberia.  The  summer  is  quite  as  long,  and  the 
winter  not  much  more  severe,  than  the  same  seasons  in 
Canada.  After  being  very  hospitably  treated  by  Mr  and 
Mrs  Grant,  we  yesterday  morning,  the  19th,  after  breakfieist, 
started  on  our  return  to  Kiachta  in  our  tarantass,  drawn  by 
four  ponies  harnessed  abreast;  the  shaft-animal  harnessed 
so  as  to  be  under  the  control  of  the  driver,  the  other  three, 
fastened  with  ropes  anyhow  to  the  vehicle,  canter  along 
almost  uncontrolled.  We  directed  our  course  to  what  might 
be  called  a  settlement,  formed  of  the  country-houses  of 
merchants  and  employes  of  Kiachta,  called  Oost  Eeeran^ 
grouped  together  on  the  banks  of  the  river.    They  have  the 


WHITS UNDA  Y— CHURCH  DOINGS.  1 1 7 

advantage  over  Mr  Grant,  who  has  no  near  neighbours,  of 
being  within  a  short  walk  of  each  other,  and  thus  they  are 
eoabled  to  meet  together  daily  to  enjoy  the  favourite  amuse- 
ment of  card-playing,  the  only  amusement  or  mode  they 
seem  to  have  here  for  passing  time,  in  conjunction  with 
champagne,  brandy,  and  porter  drinking.  There  are  some 
pretty  places  at  this  settlement,  and  a  neat  little  church, 
built  by  the  proprietors  of  the  country-houses.  The  drive 
to  this  place  occupied  three-quarters  of  an  hour.  Here  we 
called  on  the  wife  of  the  Commissary  of  the  frontier,  and  the 
highest  office  in  the  district  She  insisted  on  our  remaining 
to  dine,  which  we  agreed  to  do;  and  after  a  bath  in  the 
river,  the  preliminary  eating  and  drinking  conmienced,  and 
continued  in  a  small  way,  more  or  less,  up  to  the  time  when 
a  sabstantial  dinner  was  served  in  the  verandah.  It  con- 
sisted first  of  caviare,  which  is  very  fine  here,  prepared  from 
the  roe  of  the  sturgeon,  which  abound  in  the  Selenga. 
Then  came  vegetable-and-meat  soup,  making  a  very  good 
dish  common  in  Siberia,  called  Shtchee.  After  that  boiled 
chicken  and  rice,  the  repast  ending  up  by  a  roast  pig.  The 
lady  was  a  lively  person ;  her  eldest  child,  a  girl  of  twelve 
years  of  age,  pretty,  and  had  very  pleasing  manners. 
Whilst  at  Oost  Keeran  we  paid  a  visit  to  Mr  Chimyakin,  a 
merchant  living  in  a  good  house,  with  a  well-kept  garden, 
in  which  he  spends  much  of  his  time.  This  gentleman  gave 
me  some  seeds  of  the  Siberian  pine,  and  some  offshoots  from 
a  fruit-tree  called  oblepixa,  the  fruit  of  which — a  berry 
about  the  size  of  a  currant,  growing  close  to  the  branches  of 
the  tree,  sticking  to  them  apparently — is  said  to  have  the 
flavour  of  pine-apple,  and  is  so  much  appreciated  that  it 
is  sent  from  Kiachta  all  the  way  to  Petersburg,  and  used 
for  flavouring  ice-creams.  It  is  indigenous,  and  only  known, 
they  say,  in  this  part  of  Siberia. 

2\st. — Yesterday  was,  I  believe,  Whitsunday;  at  any  rate, 
it  was  a  grand  feast-day,  and  there  were  great  doings  in  the 
churches  of  Kiachta  and  Troitkosarfsk,  and  round  about  them. 
The  streets  of  both  places  were  decorated  with  large  branches 
of  trees  stuck  in  the  ground,  and  the  insides  of  the  churches 
were  liberally  supplied  with  the  same  material  in  smaller 
pieces,  which,  after  the  conclusion  of  high  mass,  was  brought 


1 18  HOLY  PIGEONS. 

away  by  the  devout  of  the  congregation.    The  two  principal 
chnrches,  for  this  ont-of-the-way  place,  are  very  respectable 
buildings,  particularly  that  at  Eiachta.     It  was  erected  some 
fifteen  or  twenty  years  ago  by  the  merchants  of  Eiachta,  and 
cost  a  million  of  rubles.     That  part  of  the  church  called  in 
the  Greek  Church  the  altar,  and  which  is  placed  at  the  back 
of  what  in  the  Latin  Church  is  the  altar,  is  of  highly  burn- 
ished solid  silver,  the  four  sides  having  representations  of 
the  Last  Supper,  the  Descent  from  the  Cross,  and  two  other 
holy  subjects,  raised  considerably  above  the  bright  or  burn- 
ished part  of  the  altar.     The  paintings — of  course,  all  modem 
— of  Christ  and  the  saints,  and  some  other  subjects,  are  said  to 
be  very  good.     There  is  also  a  considerable  amount  of  highly 
burnished  brass  ornamentation  throughout  the  church.     The 
floor  around  what  I  should   have  called  the  altar  is  paved 
with  handsome  slabs  of  slate,  some  of  them  three  feet  square, 
whilst  the  rest  of  the  floor  is  of  marble.     In  this  church,  as 
well  as  in  that  of  Troitkosarfsk,  there  is  a  handsome  cofSn, 
by  the  help  of  which  the  ceremony  of  interring  Christ  once 
a  year  (on  Good  Friday,  I  suppose)  is  performed  with  great 
pomp.     Besides  these,  there  are  two  other  churches  in  Troit- 
kosarfsk and  Kiachta.     Of  the  two  principal  churches,  the 
large  and  small  domes  are  covered  with  lead,  I  think ;  and 
that  at  Kiachta  is  so  bright  that  it  might  be  taken  for  highly 
polished  silver.    That  at  Troitkosarfsk  is  painted  green.    Both 
churches  have  a  large  open  space  around  them,  and  they  are 
seen  to  great  advantage.    The  masses  here  would  seem  to  be 
very  bigoted ;  they  never  pass  the  church  without  taking  off 
their  hats,  and  crossing  themselves ;  indeed,  I  am  not  sure 
that  many  of  the  better  classes  are  not  equally  bigoted  with 
their  poorer  brethren. 

Pigeons  abound  hereabouts ;  the  wild  pigeon  they  are  called, 
but  in  reality  they  are  tamer  and  bolder  than  the  tamest  of 
our  house-pigeons  in  England.  There  is  an  opening  from 
without  into  the  roofs  of  most  of  the  principal  houses  for  the 
free  ingress  and  egress  of  these  birds,  and  there  they  breed. 
The  place  is  overrun  with  them,  and  no  wonder,  for  they  are 
never  disturbed  or  killed.  I  asked  the  reason  of  this,  and  I 
was  told  that  the  dove  represented  the   Holy  Ghost,  and 


IMPUDENT  GERMAN  PEDLAR.  1 19 

therefore  enjoyed  the  immunity  in  Siberia  which  was  denied 
to  them  elsewhere,  and  to  most  other  birds  in  Siberia. 

20^^ — ^After  leaving  the  church  at  Kiachta  yesterday,  over 
which  we  were  courteously  conducted  by  a  priest,  we  went 
on  a  little  further,  and  visited  an  enclosure  of  a  couple  of 
acres  planted  with  willows,  and  containing  an  abundant  spring 
of  exceUent  water  gathered  into  a  large  reservoir.  This  en- 
cloenre  is  called  a  tea-garden.  The  gentry  resort  to  it  to 
drink  tea  sometimes,  but  more  generally  to  drink  something 
more  potent,  champagne  and  porter  being  the  favourite  beve- 
rages. The  requisites  for  gymnastic  exercises  have  been  erected 
here,  but  I  should  think  few  Siberian-Bussians  spend  much 
time  in  such  amusement.  There  seems  to  be  a  want  of  energy 
and  enterprise  shown  by  the  low  value  of  houses  and  land. 
A  bouse  adjoining  the  one  in  which  I  am  located  was  bought 
by  Mr  Grant  only  a  few  days  ago  for  400  rubles,  which  must 
have  cost  in  building  five  times  that  amount.  These  houses, 
too,  are  situated  in  the  principal  street  of  the  town.  The 
house  in  which  Mr  Grant  lives,  with  outhouses  and  yard, 
occupying  more  than  an  acre  of  ground  in  the  very  best 
situation  in  Troitkosarfsk,  may  be  bought  to-day  for  a  third 
of  what  it  cost.  Another  house,  built  of  brick,  and  which 
cost  a  few  years  ago  30,000  rubles,  may  be  bought  to-day  for 
5000  rubles.  The  fact  is,  I  suspect,  that  the  Russian  autho- 
rities here,  possessing  a  despotic  power,  exercise  it  principally, 
if  not  always,  to  the  repression  of  energy  and  enterprise. 
And  thus  it  is  that  progress  is  paralysed  in  these  places,  so 
far  distant  from  the  centre  and  residence  of  the  power  of 
Bussia.  Besides,  the  trade  between  Eussia  and  China  is 
now  carried  on  by  sea,  a  fatal  blow  to  the  monopoly  so  long 
enjoyed  by  Kiachta. 

Tie  day  before  yesterday,  a  German  with  jewellery  arrived 
from  Irkutsk.  He  announced  himself  to  be  the  acant 
courier  of  M.  Soulier,  who  is  coming  this  way  with  a  hippo- 
drome establishment,  with  the  intention  of  passing  by  Mon- 
golia on  to  Pekin ;  and  he  ended  up  by  asking  the  chief  of 
the  police  to  assign  him  some  place  where  he  might  erect 
a  stall,  and  hold  a  lottery  for  the  realisation  of  his  trinkets. 
The  chief  of  the  police  refused  to  grant  what  he  had  asked, 
wisely  reflecting  that  in  such  an  undertaking  the  poor  people 


120  CIRCUS  GOING  TO  PEKIN. 


"y 


of  Eiachta,  who  are  not  at  all  ayene  to  gamblingy  might  get 
fleeced  by  the  (}ennan,  and  in  many  cases   might  be  so 
cleaned  out  as  not  to  have  left  the  wherewithal  to  purchase 
the  necessaries  of  life  for  themselves  or  their  families.     The 
pedlar  (for  such  he  seemed  to  me  to  be),  on  his  arriyal  at 
Troitkosarfsk,  took  up  his  quarters  at  a  lodging-house,  and 
then  sent  his  senrant  to  borrow  Mr  Grant's  carriage,  that  he 
might  have  the  pleasure  of  paying  him  a  visit.     Without 
thinking,  Mr  Grant  acceded  to  this  extraordinary  request  on 
the  part  of  a  person  of  whom  he  knew  nothing;  and  in  dne 
time  the  pedlar  made  his  appearance  at  Mr  Grant^s  house. 
He  came  dressed  in  a  shining  suit  of  black,  and  on  his  breast 
hung  an  order,  a  cross  suspended  by  a  bit  of  striped  ribbon. 
Mr  Grant  addressed  him  as  M.  Soulier;  but  he  replied, 
^^No;  I  am  not  M.  Soulier,  but  his  wocmt  courier^'*     Half 
an  hour's  interview  convinced  Mr  Grant  that  the  man  was  a 
charlatan ;  and,  contrary  to  his  first  intention,  and  to  his 
known  courteous  hospitality,  he  did  not  ask  him  to  sit  down 
to  dinner,  although  the  dinner  was  being  put  on  the  table. 
The  fact  is,  that  though  impudence  often  carries  the  day  in 
the  concerns  of  this  life,  care  must  be  taken,  in  following  out 
this  maxim,  not  to  overdo  it.     In  this  case  the  dose  was  too 
strong ;  the  sending  for  the  carriage,  the  black  shining  suit 
of  clothes,  and  perhaps,  more  than  all,  the  order  so  con- 
spicuouftly  displayed  on  the  left  breast,  were  too  much  for 
Mr  Grant,  and  instead  of  inspiring  him  with  respect  for  the 
individual,  produced  the  opposite  feeling  of  contempt.    Some- 
thing of  the  same  sort  must  have  happened  in  the  interview 
with  the  chief  of  police,  which  induced  him  to  refuse  roundly 
the  pedlar's  request     In  both  cases  the  pedlar  had  overshot 
the  mark. 

23ei — I  have  been  detained  here  since  the  18th,  waiting  for 
a  companion  who  is  expecting  a  remittance  from  home.  The 
rest,  however,  may  be  as  well  for  me,  as  I  get  rid  of  the 
effects  of  my  fall  very  slowly.  The  Kutuchtu  or  Lama 
King  of  the  Mongols,  who,  when  he  is  in  the  flesh,  resides 
at  the  Lamasary  at  Urga,  died  some  time  this  year.  He  was 
a  young  man,  not  much  over  twenty,  and  it  was  said  he  had 
been  poisoned.  Soon  after  his  death  a  deputation  of  lamas 
visited  Pekin,  to  learn  from  the  Emperor  in  what  direction  they 


FINDING  A  NEW  LAMA  KING.  121 

were  to  proceed  in  order  to  find  the  living  being  into  whose 
body  had  passed  the  immortal  part  of  their  deceased  Kntnchtu. 
The  Emperor  instructed  them  that  they  mast  proceed  to 
Thibet,  the  home  of  the  head  of  the  Buddhists,  the  Dalai- 
Lama,  and  there  they  would  find  the  child  into  whose  body 
the  soul  of  the  Kutuchtu  had  found  its  way.  The  journey 
to  Thibet  is  a  long  one,  and  beset  with  difficulties,  if  not  with 
some  dangers,  and  this  has  induced  the  authorities  at  the 
Lamasaries  at  XJrga  to  consult  Mr  Grant  as  to  the  best  mode 
of  proceeding,  and  as  to  the  probable  cost  of  the  journey; 
and  they  would  fain  have  Mr  Grant  with  them,  at  any  rate 
up  to  the  borders  of  Thibet  As  we  passed  through  Urga, 
two  lamas  from  the  Lamasary  came  to  consult  Mr  Grant  on 
the  subject.  It  is  proposed  that  a  party  of  some  seven  or 
eight  lamas  shall  proceed  at  once  to  Thibet,  learn  the  where- 
abouts of  the  young  child,  the  incarnation  of  their  Kutuchtu, 
and  prepare  the  way  for  the  advance  of  some  500  lamas — a 
number  thought  adequate  to  accompany  the  infant  Kutuchtu 
fix>m  Thibet  to  his  future  home  at  Urga.  I  don't  know  how 
they  manage  at  Urga  during  the  interregnum  between  the 
departure  and  the  return  of  their  Kutuchtu ;  but  I  do  not 
hear  that  anything  has  taken  place  to  interfere  with  or  to 
disturb  the  good  order  and  quiet  of  that  Buddhist  estab- 
lishment. 

The  fact  of  one  son  in  every  Mongol  family  becoming  a 
lama  must  tend  greatly  to  make  the  institution  of  Budd- 
hism a  lasting  establishment,  by  giving,  as  it  were,  a  direct 
interest  in  its  preservation  to  all  Mongols.  Of  course,  the 
great  mass  of  the  lamas  do  not  reside  at  the  Lamasaries  at 
Urga.  On  the  contrary,  unless  at  stated  periods,  the  num- 
bers residing  at  the  Lamasaries  do  not,  I  learn,  exceed  some 
two  or  three  thousand.  The  bulk  of  the  lamas  live  upon  the 
plains  in  youarts,  and  are  employed  in  attending  to  their 
flocks  and  herds. 

We  had  a  considerable  sprinkling  of  rain  here  yesterday, 
and  the  thermometer  in  the  window-sill  fell  to  48°.  This 
morning  early  it  stood  at  50*^,  and  at  noon  it  marked  62^ 
The  range  of  the  temperature  since  I  have  been  here  may  be 
stated  at  from  48**  to  78**,  the  weather  generally  being  bright 
and  fine. 


122  TELEGRAPH  DEPARTMENT. 

Tbe  hesd  of  the  td^rqih  deptftment  liere  is  a  IL  Ki 
He  was  a  lieutenaDt  in  the  Slst  (Taldimir)  at  the  bal 
the  Afana,  and  in  charging  the  Highland  brigade  was 
wonnded.  He  was  taken  prisoner,  and  suffered  ampn 
of  one  of  his  legs.  Abbott  was  the  sorgeon  who  <^ 
He  was  nine  months  a  prisoner  at  Constantinople^  & 
and  Malta.  The  population  of  Maimatrhin  is  abont 
and  of  the  three  places  together,  Maimatrhinp  Kiachta 
Troitkosarfsk,  about  6000. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Ukn  Eiachta  in  earriftge  and  post-hones— River  Selenn,  floAting  bridf;e— Villages, 
cattle,  horses,  pastures — Bapid  driving — Dyenski— Friest  ana  b^;ging-box— ra- 
•oilake  on  Lake  Baikal,  fine  herrings-Steamer  to  listni  Nigni— Polish  exiles 
returning  from  forced  labour  in  the  mines,  now  oidled  **  colonists  '* — Great  trade 
from  China,  but  much  now  goes  bv  sea— Lake  Baikal— Snow  on  hills— Irkutsk, 
the  Amoor  Hotel— Polish  exiles  (of  1866),  M.  O.,  a  "colonist,"  among  them— 
Tanning — liquor  distilled  by  the  mrch  gives  odour  to  Russian  leather — Residence 
of  Governor-General  of  East  Siberia — ^Plain  covered  with  flowers— Forests — Mac- 
adamising roads — Forests  of  cedar,  pine,  birch — Villages— Telemph  wire  being 
carried  to  the  river  Amoor  and  port  of  Pasiette,  extend  to  Shanghae — Dense 
forests — Much  house,  boat,  and  bridge  buHding— Horses  and  cattle— Nigne  Udin- 
skia  on  river  Ida— Exiles  from  Russia — TEa-caravan— Tomskia  three  miles 
long — Good  roads,  drunken  driver — Large  rats — Crossed  the  Kansk— Rebinskia — 
Interesting  iora — Yenisei  river — Fine  scenery— Krasnoiearsk,  gold  mines,  bank, 
information  about  the  country,  resources,  erroneous  ideas  about  Siberia,  popu- 
lation and  enterprise  wanted,  nch  black  soil — Magnificent  flora — Laiger  villages — 
much  grain — Drovesof  horses — No  kitchen-gardens — Floradiminishing — Storm — 
neat  traflic  on  road— Tomsk,  capital  of  West  Siberia,  many  rich  people,  mines, 
frequent  failures,  ague,  honey-farms— Erroneous  opinion  about  the  country — 
Price  of  horses — Population  wanted— Exiles— Churohes—The  land  carpeted 
with  flowers — Steamer  for  Tumen. 

26th. — Tired  of  waiting  for  Mr  G.'s  telegram  (from  Eng- 
land), I  determined  yesterday  morning  to  start  with  a  com- 
panion on  our  long  journey.  With  the  assistance  of  my  kind 
friend  Mr  Grant,  we  had  soon  got  together  the  few  things  ne- 
cessary to  take  with  us  and  to  put  my  monetary  matters  all 
right,  and  at  6.30  p.m.  yesterday  we  started  in  the  carriage 
I  had  purchased  for  200  rubles,  drawn  by  three  post-horses. 
After  leaving  Kiachta  the  road  is  rough,  and  in  parts  deep 
sand,  hardly  any  improvement  on  the  bad  parts  of  the  road 
coming  from  Urga.  As  we  advanced,  however,  the  road  im- 
proved. The  hills  among  which  the  road  led  were  covered 
with  timber,  and  the  scenery  became  diversified  and  pleasing. 
The  first  station  we  reached  was  Ust-Kiachtinski,  a  fair- 
sized  village,  twenty-two  and  a  half  versts  from  Kiachta. 
The  next  station  was  Piravoloske.  Then  followed  Paravotne  : 
at  this  last  station  we  struck  our  old  friend  the  Chikoy  river, 
looking  very  formidable,  and  by  following  its  course  for  a 
few  miles,  came  to  the  still  more  formidable  river  Selenga, 


124         LEAVE  KIACHTA  FOR  PETERSBURG. 

into  which  the  Chikoy  falls.     Here,  by  means  of  a  floating 
bridge,  the  carriage  and  horses  with  several  carts  were  passed 
into  a  good  large  flat-bottomed  boat,  and  without  difBcnlty 
landed  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river,  some  three  to  fonr 
hundred  yards  broad  at  this  point ;  it  must  be  a  good  depth, 
too,  which  is  indicated  by  the  stillness  with  which  it  flows 
along  to  its  destination,  the  Frozen  Ocean,  at  a  rate  of  about 
four  miles  an  hour.    Height  of  the  Selenga,  2460  feet.    Lime- 
stone hills  come  down  to  the  river  on  the  right  bank,  whilst 
a  considerable  flat  bounds  it  on  the  left  bank.    At  10  MuIL 
we  stopped  at  Selinginsky,  and  at  3  p.m.  reached  ArbusofEske. 
On  leaving  Selinginsky  the  road  for  some  miles  is  a  dead 
flat,  and  very  good,  and  we  rattled  over  it  as  hard  as  the 
horses  could  go.    We  had  a  boy  driving,  and  nothing  in  the 
road  seemed  to  deter  him  at  full  speed.     We  then  struck  the 
Selenga  again,  looking  more  like  a  lake,  two  or  three  miles 
broad,  than  a  river.    The  road  runs  parallel  with  it,  in  most 
part  some  400  feet  above  it,  over  undulating  downs,  pretty 
nearly  all  the  way  to  Arbusoffske.     Everywhere  around  us 
were  horned  cattle  and  horses  grazing  on  good  pasture*     The 
plain  adjoining  had  a  good  sprinkling  of  farms  and  villages. 
On  the  opposite  side  of  the  lake  were  some  hills  of  a  respect- 
able height — ^mountains  perhaps  they  might  be  called — ^the 
whole  forming  a  good  picture  of  mixed  ^cenery.     The  road 
we  travelled,  now  dashing  down  at  the  rate  of  twenty  miles 
an  hour,  and  mounting  the  opposite  hill  before  we  drew  rein, 
was  unexceptionable,  and  as  we  bounded  along  I  could  not 
but  remark  to  my  companion  that  I  thought  I  had  never 
enjoyed  so  exhilarating  a  drive.     The  distance  between  the 
two  stations  is  thirty-five  versts,  or  about  twenty-seven  miles, 
and  we  did  it  in  less  than  three  hours. 

21th. — 7  P.M.  we  reached  Albakunske,  at  midnight  Cruchi, 
and  at  2.30  a.m.  Molinski.  Two  hours  afterwards  Palovine, 
At  6.30  A.M.  we  were  at  Uyenski,  ninety  versts  from  the  BaikaL 
At  Uyenski  we  had  the  mortification  to  find  that  two  Govern- 
ment officers  employed  in  repairing  the  telegraphic  wires  had 
taken  all  the  horses.  We  got  horses  a  little  after  9  A.1L,  and 
reached  Tarakanoske  at  12.15  p.m.  Here  again  we  were  told 
that  there  would  be  no  horses  before  5  p.m.  As  the  hours 
slipped  on,  our  chance  of  catching  the  steamer  grew  fainter. 


BEGGING  PRIESTS— LAKE  BAIKAL.  125 

Whilst  at  Tarakanoske,  uncertain  as  to  when  we  might  get 
horses,  a  priest,  accompanied  by  three  or  four  persons  carrying 
begging-boxes,  and,  after  saying  a  short  prayer,  and  sousing 
a  picture  of  Christ  which  was  hung  up  in  the  corner  of  the 
room  with  holy  water,  and  in  the  same  way  dosing  the  mis- 
tress and  maid  of  the  house,  who  gave  him  a  couple  of 
copecks,  was  turning  to  go  away,  when  it  struck  me  the 
moment  was  propitious  for  being  charitable,  and  I  put  a 
dozen  copecks  into  the  boxes.  After  they  had  left  the  room 
I  said  to  my  travelling  companion,  ^^  Who  knows  but  these 
copecks  I  have  just  given  may  produce  fruit  ? "  and  so  it 
turned  out,  for  in  half  an  hour  afterwards  one  of  the  men  who 
carried  the  begging-boxes  appeared  with  three  horses,  and  in 
a  few  minutes  afterwards  we  were  flying  along  towards  the  Bai- 
kal at  the  rate  of  twelve  versts  an  hour.  Where  the  horses  came 
from  I  never  learned,  but  they  were  certainly  not  post-horses. 

At  5  p.iL  we  reached  Kabunsk,  at  7  p.m.  Stepneduaretske, 
and  at  0.30  p.m.  we  were  at  Pasoilske  on  the  Baikal,  where 
we  hope  to  embark  in  the  morning  in  the  steamer  for  the 
other  side  of  the  lake. 

TUtk. — Whilst  we  were  waiting  for  the  steamer  yesterday, 
we  spoiled  about  the  beach  bordering  the  lake ;  the  fisher- 
men were  hauling  their  nets.  A  good  haul  of  fine  herrings 
was  taken  and  prepared  for  market  They  were  split,  salted, 
and  packed  in  tubs  upon  the  beach  where  they  were  brought 
on  shore.  Whilst  we  were  witnessing  the  operation,  distant 
from  the  pier  more  than  a  mile,  about  5  p.m.,  we  all  at  once 
discovered  the  steamer  emerging  from  a  fog-bank  towing  a 
large  barge.  She  was  close  at  hand,  so  we  had  to  run  to  the 
station-house  and  see  to  getting  our  carriage  on  board ;  but, 
as  it  turned  out,  we  need  not  have  been  in  such  a  hurry,  for 
it  was  9  P.M.  before  we  were  under  way  for  Listni  NignL 

SMJL — ^The  steamer  San  Innocentey  in  which  we  embarked 
yesterday,  is  a  comfortable  boat  with  engines  of  a  lOO-horse 
power,  four  years  old.  We  had  in  tow  a  large  craft  laden 
with  tea  and  other  merchandise,  a  launch  with  a  cargo  of 
herrings  (or  otnuluy  as  the  fish  is  called  here),  and  two 
small  boats.  The  distance  across  from  Pasoilske  to  Listni 
Nigni  is  about  105  versts,  or  about  eighty  miles,  and  we  were 
eleven  hours  in  getting  over  it.     We  had  a  head  wind  during 


1 26  POUSH  EXILES—''  COLONISTS^ 

the  night,  and  this,  with  two  heavy  boats  in  tow,  impeded  us 
considerably.  The  steamer  herself  carries  no  cargo,  being 
wholly  devoted  to  carrying  passengers.  Among  others  we 
had  seven  Polish  political  prisoners  returning  to  Irkutsk 
from  forced  laboar  in  the  mines.  They  had  been  six  years 
in  Siberia,  and  woald  now  be  classed  as  ^'  colonists ; "  that 
is,  they  would  have  to  earn  their  own  living,  and  be  free 
to  follow  any  profession  they  might  choose,  with  but  slight 
police  surveillance.  One  of  those  on  board,  a  Colonel  C., 
was  of  great  use  to  us  as  interpreter,  none  of  the  Bnssians 
speaking  any  language  but  their  own,  whilst  two  Poles  out 
of  every  three  you  meet  with  here  speak  French.  The  San 
Innocente  is  kept  in  very  good  order,  and  the  steward  served 
us  up  the  best-cooked  dinner  we  had  had  in  Siberia.  Then 
was  a  large  number  of  Eussian  women  on  board  as  passengers, 
one-half  of  them  having  paintings  of  saints  hung  around  their 
necks.  It  has  not  been  my  lot  to  meet  anjrwhere  a  more 
superstitious  people  than  the  lower  orders  of  the  Grreek 
Church  in  Siberia  seem  to  be. 

This  steamer,  they  say,  cost  three  years  ago  a  mUlion  of 
rubles.  There  are  two  other  steamers  besides  the  San  Intuh 
cente  running  upon  the  lake,  and  no  doubt  they  are  a  profitable 
speculation.  All  cargo  from  China  being  brought  to  Pasoilske 
in  one-horse  carts,  each  cart  bringing  a  load  of  from  eight  to 
ten  cwt.,  is  embarked  in  these  steamers  for  listni  Nigni,  and 
there  is  again  put  into  carts,  and  in  this  way  carried  to  Perm, 
whence  it  is  sent  by  water*  to  Novgorod,  and  thence  onward 
by  rail.  The  transit  of  cargo  from  Kiachta  to  St  Petersburg 
occupies  seven  or  eight  months ;  from  Pekin  to  St  Petersburg 
must  take  a  whole  year.  This  trade  overland  has  lately  been 
a  good  deal  curtailed,  the  trade  between  St  Petersburg  and 
China  being  now  mostly  conducted  by  sea. 

The  Baikal  is  350  miles  long  with  an  average  width  of 
thirty  miles,  and  is  1900  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea: 
it  is  deep  everywhere,  and  has  been  sounded  to  the  depth  of 
200  fathoms.  It  is  fed  by  two  considerable  rivers — ^the 
Little  Angara  on  the  north,  and  the  Selenga  on  the 
east  Its  only  outlet  is  the  Great  Angara  on  the  west, 
which  empties  itself  into  the  Yenisei,  and  that  again  into 
the  Frozen  Ocean.    The  Baikal  covers  some   11,000  square 


MAD  ACTOR.  127 

miles.     The  hills  on  the  north  side  of  it  have  now  a  consider- 
able sprinkling  of  snow.     Listni  Nigni  is  built  on  the  shore 
of  the  lake,  and  the  hills  behind  it,  covered  with  timber,  rise 
to  a  height  of  some  hundreds  of  feet.     There  were  many  craft 
on  the  stocks  bnilding  at  Listni  Nigni,  which  looks  like  a 
thriving  place.    The  Angara  here  issues  from  the  lake,  running 
in  a  broad  stream  towards  and  through  Irkutsk,  where  it  is 
joined  by  the  river  Irkut :  it  then  flows  on  northward  until 
it  meets  with  the  Yenisei,  which  it  joins,  and  flows  on  with 
it  until  it  disappears  in  the  Frozen  Ocean.     Irkutsk  stands 
some  1950  feet  above  the  sea,  and  the  level  of  the  Angara 
may  be  fifty  feet  less.    Irkutsk  is  in  52*"  17'  north  latitude, 
and  KH"*  16'  east  longitude.     The  road  from  Listni  Nigni  to 
Irkutsk  runs  in  its  whole  length  along  the  banks  of  the 
Angara.      It  is   macadamised   and  in  excellent  condition. 
There  are  two  postal  stations  between  the  lake  and  Irkutsk, 
the  whole  distance  being  forty  miles,  which  took  us  between 
five  and  six  hours  to  accomplish,  when  we  landed  at  the 
Amoor  HoteL     Our  first  introduction  to  the  hotel  was  not 
agreeable.     A  member  of  a  dramatic  troop  living  at   the 
hotel,  in  a  fit  of  drunkenness  was  playing  extraordinary  pranks 
at  the  moment  of  our  arrivaL     He  had  broken  to  atoms 
everything  that  was  breakable  in  his  own  room,  and  though 
nearly  naked,  he  was  making  sallies  into  the  courtyard, 
yelling  like  a  demon  and  frightening  the  women  out  of  their 
senses,  putting  his  foot  through  every  window  within  reach 
as  he  passed  along.     In  this  state,  covered  with  blood  stream- 
ing firom  his  hands  and  arms,  he  ran  amuck  for  a  good  half- 
hour  among  the  people  about,  until  at  last  the  police  made 
their  appearance,  and  he  was  secured  with  a  rope  and  carried 
off.     In  his  tantrums  he  seemed  to  be  still  acting  to  such  an 
extent  that  my  friend  set  him  down  as  an  actor  before  he  had 
heard  what  he  was.     The  player  disposed  of,  we  settled  quietly 
down  in  the  room  assigned  to  us.     Oar  main  difficulty  now 
arose  from  the  fact  that  not  one  person  in  the  establishment, 
kept  by  a  Pole,  spoke  a  word  of  any  other  language  than 
Bussian,  or  I  suppose  Polish,  which  was  equally  unintelli- 
gible to  us.     A  Polish  gentleman  (one  of  the  1866  political 
exiles,  of  whom  there  are  some  500  in  Irkutsk,  and  altogether, 
perhaps,  some  15,000  round  about    in  the  neighbourhood) 


128  TANNING— RUSSIA  LEATHER. 

was  sent  for  who  spoke  French^  and  he  kindly  interpreted 
our  wants  and  wishes  to  the  hotelkeeper.  Later  on,  another 
Polish  gentleman,  M.  0.,  who  spoke  English,  called  nponns. 
He  is  a  fine  old  gentleman,  a  landed  proprietor  in  Poland,  and 
he  gave  mnch  yalnable  and  interesting  information  about 
Siberia.  He  had  passed  some  months  in  England,  and  seemed 
well  acquainted  with  many  of  our  leading  agriculturists  and 
agricultural  implement  makers — Mechi,  Fisher  Hobbs,  Ban- 
some,  and  Mr  Lawes  among  the  number.  He  was  busy  with  the 
improvement  of  his  estate  when  fate  led  him  to  take  part  in 
the  Polish  outbreak  of  1866,  which  ended  in  his  being  sent 
to  Siberia.  He  is  now  classed  as  a  colonist,  and  his  friends 
in  Russia  are  doing  their  utmost  that  he  might  be  permitted 
to  return  from  exile.  In  the  meantime  his  wife  manages  the 
estate,  which,  fortunately  for  him,  belonged  to  her ;  had  it 
been  otherwise,  it  would  have  been  confiscated.* 

Tanning. — The  birch-tree  grows  everywhere  in  Siberia, 
and  to  a  large  size.  A  liquor  is  distilled  from  the  birch  cut 
into  chips,  and  is  employed  in  tanning  hides.  The  famous 
Russian  leather  is  produced  by  the  application  of  this  liquor 
in  the  tanning  process  of  the  hide.  It  is  also  used  for  the 
purpose  of  mixing  with  tar  to  liquefy  it  The  oak  is  not 
known  in  Siberia,  though  it  is  abundant  on  the  Amoor.  The 
bark  of  the  pine  is  also  employed  in  tanning. 

July  1. — A  Pole,  an  engineer,  who  had  been  eleven  yeisu^s 
in  England,  and  who  had  just  received  permission  to  return 
to  Russia,  called  on  us  to-day  to  ask  to  be  taken  on  in  our 
carriage;  but  we  think  we  are  much  better  without  him, 
though,  doubtless,  from  his  knowledge  of  the  language,  in 
case  of  emergency,  we  might  find  him  useful  on  the  road. 
We  have  considered  that  we  know  now,  by  our  experience 
between  this  and  Kiachta,  what  we  have  to  encounter  en 
route;  and  though  our  knowledge  of  Russian  is  very  slender, 
still  we  know  French  and  a  little  German,  and  we  consider 
ourselves  quite  equal  to  the  surmounting  of  any  of  the  ordi- 
nary difficulties  of  travelling.  This  Pole  and  his  luggage 
would  add  considerably  to  our  weight,  and  probably  necessi- 
tate a  fourth  horse.  His  knowledge  of  Russian  too  might  be 
turned  against  us,  if  he  were  inclined  to  be  disagreeable ;  and 

*  Thii  Poliih  gentlenuLD  wu  ahoitly  afterwiidi  liberated. 


IRKUTSK— EASTERN  SIBERIA.  129 

Bhonld  be  turn  ont  to  be  so,  he  would  be  a  source  of  discom- 
fort rather  than  of  use  to  us.  We  have  therefore  determined 
— ^wisely,  I  think — to  go  on  by  ourselves.  "  Mejor  aguantar 
el  mal  conocido,  que  el  bien  por  conocer."  Better  suffer  a 
known  evil  than  change  for  uncertain  good. 

Irkutsk  is  a  wood-built  city  of  wide  streets,  and  very  open, 
containing  a  population  of  23,000  inhabitants.  There  must  be 
a  dozen  churches  (all  Greek),  built  principally  by  subscriptions 
raised  among  the  inhabitants ;  one  Latin  church,  and  one 
Protestant  chapel — this  last  for  the  use  of  the  Germans  who 
are  here  in  the  service  of  the  Government,  most  of  them  in 
the  army,  I  believe.  Irkutsk  can  boast  of  a  cathedral  and  an 
archbishop.  We  yesterday  visited  the  archbishop's  private 
chapel  attached  to  his  palace,  the  decorations  of  which  are 
in  good  taste,  and  struck  me  as  particularly  chaste  and  appro- 
priate. There  were  some  half-dozen  paintings,  but  it  con- 
tained no  graven  images. 

The  Governor-General  of  Eastern  Siberia  resides  at  Irkutsk. 
The  present  Governor  is  General  Kotsakoff;  he  had  just 
returned  to  his  post  from  Petersburg,  bringing  a  young  wife 
with  him. 

Id. — Irkutsk  boasts  of  a  museum,  which  I  visited  yes- 
terday with  M.  0.  The  contents  consist  of  some  Mongol 
Bureat  dresses;  a  few  badly-stuffed  birds;  some  mineralogical 
specimens,  huddled  togetber  in  dark  corners  where  the 
light  never  penetrates ;  a  seal  from  the  Baikal ;  a  wretched 
specimen  of  a  stuffed  horse  from  Thibet ;  a  Shamey  priest 
in  the  act  of  prophesying ;  a  few  antediluvian  remains ; 
a  skin  of  a  snake ;  a  score  or  two  of  shells ;  specimen  of 
plumbago  (graphite)  from  a  mine  near  Tungo, — the  whole 
huddled  together,  and  nothing  named — a  wretched  attempt 
at  a  museum.  Crossed  the  river  yesterday,  and  went  with 
M.  0.  to  see  the  Governor-General's  villa,  whence  a  good 
view  is  had  of  Irkutsk;  also  visited  some  public  gardens 
with  him,  which  are  not  of  much  account  Saw  a  large  herd 
of  milch  cows,  of  much  better  breed  than  those  about 
Eiachta;  some  of  them  very  good  specimens,  and  among 
them  Bome  polled  cattle  that  would  have  been  admired  even 
in  England.     The  pasturage  about  Irkutsk  is  good,  and  the 

scenery  pretty.    At  6  p.m.  we  left,  crossing  the  Angara  at  its 

I 


130  CARPET  OF  WILD  FLOWERS. 

confluence  with  the  Irknt  by  a  bridge  of  boats,  and  the 
Irkut  afterwards  by  a  wooden  bridge.  We  are  now  at  Bor- 
koba,  twelve  versts  from  Irkutsk,  waiting  for  horses ;  waited 
seven  and  a  half  hours,  and  left  at  2.20  A.M. 

Zd. — Arrived  at  Sukofskia  at  3.40,  and  left  at  4.20  A.]f. 
Eeached  Talmingskiu  at  7.20  A.M.,  and  left  at  9.20  A.1L; 
crossed  the  Angara  by  ferry  at  7  a.m.  First  part  of  the  road 
lined  by  forests  on  both  sides ;  now,  more  cleared  land,  and 
a  good  deal  of  grain  growing.  Road  excellent ;  arrived  at 
Mulbingskia  at  11.5,  and  left  at  11.25  A.M,  Arrived  at 
Polovinia  at  1.30  a.m.  A  great  part  of  the  road  just  passed 
crosses  a  plain  carpeted  with  flowers,  red,  bine,  and  white, 
all  mingled  together;  roses  and  yellow  lilies  abound.  I  think 
I  have  never  seen  any  carpet  of  wild  flowers  to  equal  it.  We 
have  just  completed  a  stage  of  twenty-nine  versts  in  two 
hours  and  five  minutes,  and  are  again  waiting  for  horses. 
Since  we  left  Kiachta  on  25th  June,  we  have  had  constant 
fine  weather,  with  the  temperature  ranging  between  66*  and 
70""  in  the  shade ;  and  I  am  told  the  climate  throughout  the 
whole  year  is  remarkably  healthy.  Siberia  is  never  troubled 
with  epidemics.  Height  of  this  station  (Polovinia)  is  2300 
feet ;  a  large  village. 

\th — To  save  time  we  hired  private  horses  yesterday.  Our 
road  lay  through  a  forest  the  whole  day.  Some  thousands 
of  men  and  one-horse  carts  employed  in  repairing  the  old 
road,  and  in  places  making  a  new  one,  macadamising.  Some 
rain  to-day,  and  the  road  heavy. 

^th, — We  met  with  a  little  delay  yesterday,  but  we  have 
kept  on  night  and  day  since  we  started  from  Irkutsk,  and 
now,  at  10  A.M.,  I  find  we  are  distant  from  that  city  436 
versts  ;  but  here,  at  Hoodoo  Grelanskia  station,  we  have  again 
to  wait  for  horses.  Our  road  all  night  lay  through  a  forest 
of  cedars,  pine,  and  birch,  the  latter  predominating.  Tillages 
are  met  with  every  twenty  to  thirty  versts.  Crossed  three 
rivers.  We  accompany  the  electric  telegraph  all  the  way 
from  Irkutsk,  as  we  did  from  Kiachta  to  the  Baikal.  There 
are  two  wires  suspended  on  poles  twenty-one  to  twenty- 
three  feet  high,  and  from  eighteen  to  twenty-four  inches  in 
diameter,  between  Kiachta  and  the  Baikal :  afterwards  the  poles 
may  not  be  more  than  twenty  feet  high,  and  of  somewhat  lest 


TELEGRAPH  TO  THE  AMOOR.  131 

diameter.  They  have  marked  upon  them  very  legibly  the  date 
of  erection,  and  are  numbered  between  every  two  post-stations, 
about  thirteen  poles  in  a  verst,  or  one  hundred  yards  apart 
The  oldest  posts  have  1863  as  the  date^of  erection,  and  many 
have  been  renewed  <in  1869.  They  are  either  of  pine  or 
cedar ;  the  latter,  I  think,  generally.  The  Government  \a  now 
busy  in  carrying  the  wire  on  to  the  Amoor  and  to  the  port 
of  Pasiette,  whence  it  may  be  extended  by  a  submarine  cable 
of  no  great  length  to  Shanghae.  At  the  Baikal  the  line 
runs  round  the  south-east  end  of  the  lake,  and  the  traveller 
by  steamer  across  the  lake  loses  it  until  he  gets  to  Irkutsk, 
where  he  picks  it  up  again,  and  acknowledges  it  as  an  old 
friend.  Temperature  very  pleasant  The  forest  is  more  or 
less  cleared  on  both  sides  of  the  highway,  and  also  more  or 
less  cultivated,  sometimes  to  the  distance  of  a  mile  or  two  on 
both  sides,  but  more  generally  only  to  the  width  of  a  few 
hundred  yards.  There  is  so  far  no  appearance  of  roads 
branching  away  from  the  post-road.  Nor  do  I  suppose  there 
are  any  villages  except  those  on  the  main  line.  Beyond  the 
cleared  spaces  all  seems  a  dense  forest.  The  principal  grain 
now  growing  is  rye,  which  is  in  ear,  and  should  be  fit  to  cut 
in  a  fortnight  or  three  weeks.  Wheat  is  sown  in  May  and 
reaped  in  August  There  are  no  green  crops,  so  far  as  I  have 
yet  seen.  The  plough  in  use  is  of  the  most  primitive  kind : 
it  is  drawn  by  a  horse  in  shafts.  There  is  a  deal  of  work 
in  progress  everywhere,  boat-building,  bridge-building,  and 
house-building,  all  in  the  most  solid  manner,  as  timber  costs 
nothing  hereabouts  but  felling  and  working  it  afterwards. 
Homed  cattle  and  horses  are  very  numerous.  Since  we  left 
Irkutsk  we  have  not  seen  a  single  cart  with  tea  going  westward. 
Noon. — A  minute  ago  there  was  no  appearance  what- 
ever of  horses,  when  a  **  man  in  authority "  arrived  at  the 
station.  He  asked  me  in  French  how  the  roads  were  further 
on,  so  I  told  him,  and  added  that  I  had  been  waiting  for 
horses  at  this  station  for  the  last  three  hours.  He  at  once 
called  for  the  postmaster's  book,  and  therein  read  a  copy  of 
our  padrosna^  talked  for  a  minute  with  the  postmaster,  and 
said  to  me,  as  he  left  the  room  to  get  into  his  own  carriage, 
which  was  already  horsed, "  On  vous  servira  tout  de  suite."  An 
old  lady  who  arrived  at  the  station  before  us  was  grumbling 


132  VILLAGES. 

terribly.  I  can't  help  the  poor  old  lady,  and  the  genie  who 
worked  this  sudden  change  in  our  prospects  is  already  far 
on  the  road  beyond  her  reach,  whilst  our  horses  are  being 
put  to.  We  reached  Koorgaloviskia  at  3.10  p.m.,  and  Nigne 
Ddinskia  at  5.50  p.m.,  where  we  are  again  stuck  for  want  of 
horses,  and  may  have  to  wait  for  them  until  10  p.m.  This 
town  is  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Ida,  and  is  one  of 
the  prettiest  places  I  have  seen  in  Siberia.  There  are  some 
high  hills  to  the  west  in  the  distance.  It  is  a  town  of  the 
second  category.  The  road  during  the  last  stages  is  entirely 
through  forest.  No  cleared  land  on  either  side.  Sandy,  and  a 
declivity  the  whole  way.    The  height  here  is  about  l&OO  feet 

^th — 7  A.M.,  still  at  Nigne  Udinskia  waiting  for  horses, 
and  no  certainty  as  to  when  we  may  get  them.  A  Russian 
colonel  arrived  here  last  evening  and  has  departed ;  another 
arrived  at  midnight,  and  he  also  will  have  the  preference 
over  us  for  horses ;  so  if  these  men  keep  arriving  before 
horses  accumulate,  we  may  have  to  remain  for  any  length 
of  time.  Both  these  colonels  spoke  French,  and  were  very 
accommodating,  except  in  the  way  of  horses.  Neither  of 
them  offered  to  give  up  his  turn  to  be  served  in  our  favour. 
It  has  rained  all  night;  slept  in  the  tarantass,  and  not 
badly.  Paid  a  ruble  last  night  for  a  tough  beefsteak  and 
some  tea. 

^ith — We  got  our  horses  at  1.20  p.m.,  and  right  glad  we 
were  to  be  upon  the  road  again.  We  are  now  at  Koluch- 
inskia,  having  done  many  versts  since  we  left  Nigne  Udin- 
skia at  1.20  yesterday  (twenty-seven  and  a  half  hours).  We 
have  crossed  two  rivers,  the  Ida  and  the  Berusinskia,  both 
of  course  y-unning  north,  as  indeed  do  all  the  rivers  in 
Siberia,  for  they  all  take  their  rise  in  Mongolia,  to  the  south, 
where  even  the  tableland  is  on  an  average  some  3000  feet 
above  the  level  of  any  part  of  Siberia  I  have  yet  seen. 
Height  of  the  Berusinskia  about  1200  feet.  Whenever  we 
come  to  a  village,  we  meet  with  more  cleared  ground,  and 
always  some  grain  growing  about  it,  though  not  much  at  any 
time,  principally  rye.  The  opening  through  the  forest  on 
this  side  of  Irkutsk  is  only  a  few  hundred  yards  wide,  little 
more  than  for  the  road  and  the  telegraph  wires  to  pass.  A 
carpet  of  flowers  borders  the  road  in  all  its  length*    The  wild 


EXILES— TEA-CAR  A  VAN.  133 

rose  is  everywhere,  and  so  is  the  yellow,  the  white,  and  the 
striped  lily.  The  road  has  been  very  good  lately.  It  has 
rained,  bat  not  mnch.  Met  some  exiles  being  brought  from 
Bnssia,  not  Poles,  I  think,  and  some  troops  going  east- 
ward. Passed  a  tea-caravan  going  westward.  This  village, 
Tomskia,  where  we  are  now  changing  horses,  is  nearly  if  not 
quite  three  miles  long  ;.  a  single  street,  sixty  yards  wide,  as 
indeed  are  nearly  all  the  main  streets  in  Siberia,  towns  and 
villages.  Ellatchefskia,  12.30  p.m.  Since  Tinskia  we  have 
changed  horses  four  tunes,  and  have  come  123  versts  in 
sixteen  hours.  The  road  in  excellent  order  all  through, 
nearly  if  not  quite  equal  to  our  own  macadamised  highways. 
Passed  through  a  considerable  tract  of  open  pasture-country, 
bat  have  seen  very  little  grain.  The  aneroid  tells  us  that 
we  are  now  only  1000  feet  above  the  sea.  Kanzk,  which 
we  have  just  come  from  (forty-seven  versts  from  this),  is  a 
district  town  of  some  little  importance.  Between  Elonskia 
and  Kanzk  had  a  drunken  driver,  who  threatened  to  capsize 
OS  more  than  once,  and  was  otherwise  very  troublesome. 
We  now  suffer  no  detention  for  want  of  horses,  and  hope  to 
reach  Krasnoiearsk  by  noon  to-morrow,  or  perhaps  earlier. 
An  uncommonly  large  rat  abounds  on  this  part  of  the  road, 
burrowing  in  the  banks  on  each  side  of  it.  It  is  a  speckled 
brown  on  the  back,  with  a  very  light  brown  belly,  a  large 
tail,  so  large  that  we  at  first  took  the  animal  to  be  a  squirreL 
At  Kanzk  crossed  the  river  of  that  name  by  a  floating  bridge, 
a  large  river  flowing  northwards.  The  usual  contrivance 
for  crossing,  by  means  of  a  boat  anchored  in  the  middle 
of  the  river,  is  in  use  here.  Bebinskia,  a  large  village,  at 
which  we  have  just  arrived,  4.30  p.m.  :  it  must  contain 
3000  to  4000  inhabitants,  and  it  can  boast  of  some  good 
loghouses  of  two  stories,  but  the  stories  are  very  low.  A 
stream  runs  through  it  Height  1400  feet.  A  good  extent 
of  pasture-land  about  it,  and  some  grain  growing.  Vegetables 
are  not  much  cultivated  in  this  part  of  Siberia.  The  flora  on 
the  roadside  very  fine,  and  something  new  always  appearing ; 
some  primroses  and  some  red  poppies  have  turned  up  to-day. 
All  the  poppies  I  had  seen  before  to-day  were  either  yellow 
or  white.  The  foxglove  is  here,  and  the  spurge  is  very 
fine.     The  country  is  well  stocked  with  horses  and  horned 


134  PIN^  SCENERY— GOLD  MINES. 

cattle.     Eggs  and  milk  always  to  be  procured  at  the  post- 
houses. 

8^^ — The  electric  telegraph  wires,  which  we  lost  at  the  Baika], 
we  picked  up  again  at  Lrkntsk,  and  have  kept  them  as  com- 
panions ever  since,  and  shall  continue  to  do  sa  No  doubt 
they  seem  like  a  link  binding  us  to  home,  though  a  longwaj 
from  it.  Weather  pleasantly  warm.  Temperature  in  the 
shade  70^ 

On  the  Yenisei  river.  We  arrived  here  fit)m  Potoiskia 
station  at  7.30  a.m.,  and  are  now  being  ferried  across.  The 
river  must  be  a  mile  wide  at  this  ferry,  with  a  current  of 
three  to  four  knots  an  hour.  The  road  from  Potoiskia,  which 
we  left  at  6.40  A.M.,  is  excellent ;  and  up  to  this  point  runs 
through  a  hill-and-dale  country,  with  much  more  cultivation 
than  I  have  hitherto  seen  in  Siberia.  The  scenery  fine,  and 
the  carpet  of  flowers  on  both  sides  of  the  road  magnificent 
We  have  brought  the  yellow  lily  with  us  now  for  more  than  a 
thousand  versts.  The  highest  part  of  the  road  is  1900  feet 
At  10.30  we  arrived  at  Erasnoiearsk,  a  district  town  of  9000 
inhabitants,  situated  on  the  Yenisei,  a  river  that  carries  with 
it  all  the  small  streams  it  gathers  as  it  goes  along,  and  ends 
by  being  engulfed  in  the  Frozen  Ocean.  This  town  is 
sustained  by  money  spent  in  it  by  the  workers  of  the  gold 
mines  situated  roundabout,  but  many  of  them  hundreds  of 
versts  distant.  It  has  one  good  street,  and  many  respectably 
built  houses,  some  of  them  brick. 

lOM. — There  is  a  bank  here,  at  which  I  changed  some 
notes  for  small  silver.  No  one  in  it  could  speak  a  word  of 
any  language  but  Russian.  We  are  at  the  St  Petersburg 
Hotel,  where  they  possess  no  more  knowledge  of  languages 
than  at  the  bank ;  but  by  dint  of  inquiries  we  have  found 
a  German  smith,  who  has  repaired  some  breakages  in  our 
carriage,  and  has  charged  us  twice  as  much  as  he  should  have 
done,  five  rubles ;  and  a  Russian  gentleman,  living  in  the 
hotel,  has  come  to  our  aid  with  French.  He  tells  me  there 
are  boats  now  that  leave  Tomsk  every  three  or  four  days  for 
Tumen,  and  that  the  water  route  is  much  to  be  preferred 
to  the  road.  He  advises  me  also  to  sell  the  tarantass  at 
Tomsk,  and  to  provide  myself  with  a  vehicle  at  Tumen  to 
proceed  thence  to  Perm,  which  he  says  is  easily  done,  thus 


CLIMATE  OF  SIBERIA.  135 

saying  the  cost  of  our  carriage  from  Tomsk  to  Tamen.  This 
seems  all  satisfactory  enough.  This  gentleman  is  from  St 
Petersburg,  and  came  to  Siberia  a  year  ago.  He  has  a  high 
opinion  of  the  natural  wealth,  both  mineral  and  vegetable, 
of  the  country,  which  only  requires  population  for  its  develop- 
ment. He  says  that  in  St  Petersburg  generally  the  same 
erroneons  opinion  is  entertained  that  is  held  in  England, 
viz.,  that  it  is  a  cold,  inhospitable  country,  containing 
nothing  of  value  but  its  mines,  worked  by  gangs  of  prisoners, 
instead  of  being  what  it  really  is,  a  country  possessing  a 
good  climate,  with  a  summer  quite  as  long  as  it  is  in 
Bussia  proper,  and  the  winter  not  at  all  more  severe  than  it 
is  at  St  Petersburg,  with  a  soil  of  incomparable  richness, 
manifested  by  the  natural  luxuriance  with  which  it  is  every- 
where covered,  and  by  the  rapid  growth  of  cereals  and  splendid 
pasturage  wherever  the  land  has  been  cleared  so  as  to  admit 
of  cultivation.  Population  and  enterprise  are  what  is  wanted 
to  develop  its  vast  resources.  As  for  the  natural  and 
varied  beauty  of  the  landscape,  it  surpasses  that  of  most 
countries  in  which  it  has  been  my  lot  to  travel.  Height  of 
the  Yenisei  at  the  ferry  only  1000  feet.  Warm  at  Kras- 
noiearsk  ;  temperature  in  my  room  at  9  a.m.,  78°. 

WtK — We  are  now,  7.30  a.m.,  at  Tarutinskia,  having 
made  since  2.30  p.m.  yesterday,  when  we  left  Erasnoiearsk, 
149  versts,  of  which  100  versts  of  the  road  were  through  an 
undulating  country  cleared  of  timber ;  indeed,  a  portion  of  it 
had  no  appearance  of  timber  ever  having  been  upon  it,  excellent 
pasture-land ;  and  wherever  the  plough  was  at  work,  it  turned 
up  a  rich  black  soil.  During  the  remainder  of  the  distance, 
the  road,  as  it  generally  is,  was  hemmed  in  by  trees.  The 
magnificent  flora  continues.  The  villages  we  meet  with  are 
larger  as  we  come  westward,  containing,  many  of  them,  I 
should  say,  from  3000  to  4000  inhabitants.  They  are  all 
pretty  nearly  similarly  situated  on  the  sunny  slopes  of  rising 
ground  looking  to  the  south.  A  steep  descent  from  the 
southern  side  generally  ends  at  the  bottom  in  a  rivulet ;  and 
on  the  opposite  bank  the  village  is  sure  to  be  found.  They 
are  all  more  or  less  built  on  the  same  plan,  a  wide  street 
running  through  them  from  end  to  end ;  and  in  very  large 
villages,  a  few  cross  streets  also.     Height  of  the  river  we 


136     PASTURES— LARGE  DROVES  OF  HORSES. 

are  now  crossing,  on  leaving  Achinsk,  is  1200  feet    Beached 
the  station  of  Erasnoriechinskia  at  1.50  p.m.  ;  passed  through 
a  good  breadth  of  open  country  in  the  last  stage,  much  of  it 
a  fine  black  soil,  under  grain  cultivation.     There  seems  to  be 
no  green  crops  in  Siberia.     ^VTieat,  rye,   and  oats  are  the 
chief  crops,  rye  more  particularly,  which  is  now  well  forward, 
and  ought  to  be  ripe  in  a  fortnight  or  three  weeks  hence. 
Made  since  yesterday  195   versts.     Whilst  waiting  at  the 
station,  a  thousand  one-horse  empty  carts  have  passed,  going 
towards  China.  Reached  Bogotolskia  station  at  5  p.m.,  having 
done  the  stage  of  thirty-one  versts  in  two  hours  and  a  halt 
The  road  leads  over  cleared  land  in  its  whole  extent ;  pasture 
principally,  upon  which  large  droves  of  horses  are  feeding. 
Some  hills  in  the  distance  covered  with  timber.     This  is  a 
large  village.     Weather  fine  ;  temperature  in  the  shade,  75'. 
Height,  1250  feet.     Arrived  at  Bolshaiekosul  at  6.30  p.m., 
having  done  the  stage,  sixteen  versts,  in  one  and  a  quarter 
hours. 

VZth. — At  5  A.M.  we  reached  Suslova,  where  we  crossed  a 
river.  The  road  for  the  last  two  long  stages  (sixty  versts)  is 
about  as  rough  as  any  I  have  travelled  over  in  Siberia.  The  vil- 
lages hereabouts  are  large,  but  few  and  far  between,  pasture- 
land  generally;  little  grain  cultivation.  To  get  to  Tomsk 
we  have  now  234  versts  to  do,  and  we  hope  to  be  there  by 
noon  to-morrow.  Weather  cool  and  pleasant  At  1.40  we 
arrived  at  Bereculskia,  having  done  the  stage,  twenty-eight 
versts,  in  two  and  a  half  hours.  At  4.50  p.m.  arrived  at 
Pochitanskia,  driven  by  a  very  unsteady  boy,  going  along 
either  at  a  snail's  pace,  or  tearing  over  the  road  at  fall  gal- 
lop, every  moment  threatening  our  now  poor  shaky  carriage 
with  destruction.  Road  middling,  but  little  cleared  land  on 
either  side  of  it.  Rye  the  only  crop  growing.  No  such 
thing  as  a  kitchen-garden  in  any  village  we  have  passed 
through,  though  the  soil  may  be  ever  so  rich.  At  3  p.il 
reached  Paleonskia,  twenty-two  versts,  which  we  did  in  two 
hours,  partly  over  a  rough  road  and  hilly  pasture-land. 
Height  of  this  place  about  1200  feet  Fewer  flowers  now 
line  the  road.  The  yellow  lily,  after  having  accompanied  as 
for  1500  miles,  seems  to  have  become  tired,  and  has  remained 
behind.     Neither  have  we  any  poppies  with  us,  red,  white. 


TOMSK— MISS  STEAMER.  137 

and  jellow ;  they  have  all  been  left  behind.  Crossed  a  river 
here  by  the  ferry.  A  roughish  time  of  it  last  night — thun- 
der, lightning,  and  rain.  Kept  on  the  road  nevertheless, 
and  at  6  A.H.  arrived  at  this  station,  Semilaognia,  where  we 
are  twenty-nine  versts  from  Tomsk.  The  road  has  been 
over  downs,  very  undulating.  Villages  more  numerous  again, 
and  the  country  more  populated.  Great  traffic  both  ways  in 
one-horse  carts,  with  which  we  are  constantly  coming  into 
contact  A  chronic  feud  seems  to  exist  between  the  post- 
boys and  the  one-horse  carters,  the  former  insisting  on  their 
right  to  the  road,  and  the  latter  always  passively  disputing  it. 
13^ — Our  axles  very  hot  this  morning,  which  shows  what 
a  high  rate  of  speed  we  have  kept  up  from  the  last  station, 
about  fourteen  versts  an  hour.  We  grease  our  wheels,  on  an 
average,  every  eighty  versts.  At  7.30  a.m.  we  arrived  at 
Tomsk  in  sixty-four  hours  from  Krasnoiearsk,  a  distance  of 
554  versts.  The  whole  distance  from  Kiachta  to  Tomsk, 
including  108  versts  across  the  Baikal,  is  2121^  versts.  We 
have  been  eighteen  days  in  coming,  out  of  which  we  remained 
four  days  at  Irkutsk. 

15^ — ^We  have  been  unfortunate  at  Tomsk  in  missing 
a  steamer  for  Tumen,  which  left  about  two  hours  after  we 
arrived,  and  all  owing  to  our  not  being  able  to  find  any  one 
who  could   speak   a  word  of  any  European  language    but 
fiossian,  until  it  was  too  late.     As  we  drove  down  to  the 
river,  we  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  the  steamer  moving 
airay.     It  was  very  annoying,  but  cannot  be  remedied,  and 
we  must  just  wait  as  patiently  as  we  can  until  the  day  after 
to-morrow,  when,  they  tell  us,  there  will  be  another  steamer. 
In  the  mejmtime  we  are  making  acquaintances  here.     The 
first  man  we   ran    against  who  could  speak  French  turned 
out  to  be  French  master  in  the  gymnasium  establishment, 
M.  Tonnand,  who  asked  me  to  call  on   Mrs   C,  an  Eng- 
lish lady,  married  to  a  Pole,  who  is  at  the   head  of  the 
Government  gymnasia  here.     So  we  called  on  her  at  once, 
and  have  since  found  both  the  lady  and  her  husband  to 
be  of  great  use  to  us.     Mrs  0.  is  the  daughter  of  English 
parents,  but  born  in  Sweden,  and  never  having  been  in  Eng- 
land.    Her  father  was  an  officer  in  the  Swedish  army,  whose 
name  was  Whitlock.      Mrs   C.    came  to  Tomsk   nineteen 


138  DESCRIPTION  OF  TOMSK, 

years  ago^  with  her  husband,  and  has  lived  here  ever  since. 
We  have  engaged  our  passage  in  the   steamer  Irtish,  and 
hope  to  start  on  17th.     A  cabin  for  two  costs  forty  rubles. 
Our  tarantass  we  shall  sell  here  before  we  start,  if  we  can; 
and  if  not,  we  shall  leave  it  to  be  disposed  of.    Tomsk  is  the 
largest  town  I  have  seen  in  Siberia.     It  is  prettily  situated 
on  the  river  Tom,  and  has  the  small  rivulet  of  Oshaika  run- 
ning through  it     The  capital  of  Western  Siberia  contains 
some  23,000  inhabitants.    It  is  here  that  steamboat  communi- 
cation commences  with  Tumen,  by  means  of  the  rivers  Tom, 
Ob,  &c.     The  traffic  is  large,  and  a  steamer,  towing  one  or 
more  large  barges  laden  with  goods,  leaves  for  Tumen  every 
four  or  five   days.     The  whole  of  the  commerce  between 
Bussia,  Siberia,    and  China   passes  through  Tomsk,  which 
makes  it  comparatively  a  busy  place.     There  are  many  rich 
men  here,  some  having  acquired  their  wealth  by  working 
mines,  others  by  commercial  pursuits.      A  M.  A.  is  said  to 
be  worth  a  million   sterling.     Of  course  he  possesses  the 
finest  house  in  Tomsk.      So  costly  indeed  is  it,  they  say,  that 
the  insurance  company  have  refused  to  insure  it  against  fire. 
The  value  of  it,  I  suppose,  is  so  great  that   the  company 
don't  choose  to  take  so  large  a  risk  in  one  line.     Queer 
stories  are  told  about  the  manner  of  acquiring  wealth  here. 
Frequent  failures  are  said  to  be  one  method  adopted.     My 
informant,  in  speaking  of  the  people  here,  said,  "  Of  course 
they  are  generally  but  the  scum,  and  the  descendants  of  the 
scum,  of  llussian  society.     They  are  so  fond  of  cheating,  that 
I  believe,    rather  than  have  nobody  to   cheat,  they  would 
cheat  themselves."     There  are  many  good  brick  buildings, 
and  many  houses  are  now  in  course  of  erection,  but  the  bulk 
of  the   town  is  constructed  of  pine  logs.     The  ground  on 
which  the  town  stands  is  irregular  in  height.     Where  I  am 
lodged,  the  aneroid  marks  only  450  feet  above  the  sea,  which 
may  account  for  the  statement  I  have  heard,  that   ague  is 
prevalent  at  times.     The  streets  are  wide  and  unpaved,  with 
a  raised  trottoir  of  wood  (plank)  at  the  sides.     The  neigh- 
bourhood is  famous  for  its  honey ;  and  one  may  judge  from 
the  fact,  of  what  the  flora  of  the  country  must  be,  that  some 
men  keep  as  many  as  3000  hives  on  their  property. 

I6th. — I  drove  yesterday  some  five  miles  from  town  to  see 


GREAT  PRODUCTION  OF  HONEY.  139 

a  small  establishment  of  bees.  The  hives  are  trunks  of  trees 
of  different  sorts  of  wood^  standing  upright  about  four 
and  a  half  feet  from  the  ground,  on  three  small  stakes 
driven  into  the  ground  some  six  inches  above  the  surface. 
These  trunks  of  trees  are  quite  straight,  and  are  hollowed 
out,  some  of  them  having  an  inside  diameter  of  a  foot,  whilst 
others  have  a  diameter  of  eighteen  inches.  A  movable 
piece  is  cut  out  of  the  side  of  this  trunk  to  enable  the  oper- 
ator to  get  at  the  honey  when  the  time  comes  for  taking  it. 
Cross  sticks  are  placed  for  the  bees  to  build  their  combs 
upon,  and  a  hole  through  which  they  enter  the  trunk  with 
their  burdens  is  provided  with  a  tiny  bridge  leading  up  to  it, 
and  with  a  tiny  landing-place  close  to  it,  so  that  when  seve- 
ral bees  arrive  at  the  same  time,  as  was  the  case  yesterday, 
they  have  a  place  to  rest  upon  until  they  can  enter  into  the 
hive.  I  am  told  the  honey  is  taken  by  smoking  the  bees 
and  rendering  them  half  insensible,  but  unless  occasionally, 
when  the  hive  is  very  weak,  the  bees  are  never  kiHed.  These 
trunks  of  trees,  with  their  occupants,  are  placed  during  winter 
in  a  sort  of  cellar  underground,  which  is  warmed  sufficiently 
to  keep  the  bees  from  suffering  during  the  extreme  cold, 
when  the  thermometer,  I  am  told,  often  gets  down  to  30^ 
Beaumur.  These  trunk-hives  stand  out  in  a  half-cleared  piece 
of  land,  in  rows,  about  fifteen  feet  apart.  There  were  only 
fifty-three  hives  in  the  small  establishment  I  visited  yester- 
day, twenty-three  of  which  were  more  or  less  empty,  the  bees 
having  been  destroyed  by  unusually  inclement  weather  in 
spring.  The  honey  is  sold  in  the  market  at  six  rubles  the 
pood  of  forty  Bussian  pounds,  equal  to  about  thirty-six 
English  pounds,  so  we  might  call  the  price  about  sixpence  a 
pound.  What  an  idea  it  gives  of  the  flora  of  this  country, 
when  we  are  told  that  3000  hives  are  sometimes  kept  on  one 
farm,  producing  probably  some  60,000  lbs.  honey  in  one  sea- 
son !  Indeed,  I  was  told  that  a  pood  or  thirty-six  lbs.  honey 
is  often  taken  from  one  hive  :  and  this  in  what  we  have  been 
taught  to  believe  the  least  desirable  country  in  the  whole 
world  to  reside  in.  The  mowing  season  has  just  commenced : 
I  saw  some  men  employed  at  it  yesterday  on  the  bee-farm. 
The  herbage  was  very  coarse,  but  the  cattle  eat  the  hay 
made  from  it  greedily  enough  in  the  winter  season,  when  they 


I40  TRADE  OF  TOMSK. 

can  get  nothing  else.  I  have  seen  some  handsome  horses  in 
Tomsk,  about  fourteen  hands  high,  a  cross  between  the 
Russian  and  the  Siberian,  price  about  forty  rubles,  or  £6. 
Population  is  much  wanted ;  the  women  even  are  employed 
in  mowing;  a  day  labourer  gets  3s.  a  day  in  Tomsk,  and 
does  very  little  work  for  it  Drunkenness  is  the  standing  vice 
of  the  Bussians :  in  Tomsk  there  are,  I  am  told,  4000  public- 
houses.  On  an  average,  I  was  told,  that  from  500  to  1000 
Bussians  pass  through  Tomsk  weekly  from  Bussia,  among 
whom  many  may  be  set  down  as  political  prisoners.  Some 
large  buildings  are  now  being  erected  just  outside  the  town 
for  the  accommodation  of  these  prisoners,  that  they  might 
rest  a  few  days  before  passing  on  into  Eastern  Siberia.  The 
temperature  seems  to  range  here  at  present  between  60^  and 
IS^  in  the  shade.  Weather  fine.  Height  of  the  jiver  above 
the  sea,  400  feet 

18M. — Tomsk  is  situated  near  the  Tom:  it  is  built  on 
uneven  ground,  the  highest  part  of  it  standing  a  good  200 
feet  above  the  lowest.  Good  views  of  the  city  may  be  had 
from  many  points  within  the  city  itself ;  and  as  the  streets 
are  wide,  and  the  houses  many  of  them  handsome  structures, 
each  standing  in  its  own  compound,  and  the  churches,  of 
which  there  are  a  great  many,  are  placed  in  commanding 
situations,  and  on  the  outside  at  any  rate  kept  in  good 
repair,  many  of  these  views  are  very  picturesque.  Tomsk 
is  a  thriving  town,  and  efforts  are  being  made  to  macadamise 
the  streets — ^an  expensive  operation,  in  consequence  of  their 
great  width.  The  wooden  trottoir  is  raised  a  foot  or  two 
above  the  rest  of  the  street  Besides  the  Greek  churches, 
there  are  several  Catholic  chapels,  and  one  Lutheran — this 
last  only  lately  built,  and  not  yet  open.  Drove  out  yester- 
day to  a  country  place  some  eight  versts  distant ;  attached 
to  it  is  a  water-mill  for  grinding  corn.  The  situation  is 
pretty,  on  a  small  stream,  from  which  the  water  is  drawn 
that  works  the  milL  The  Tom,  too,  is  only  some  400  or 
500  yards  from  the  house.  The  place  belongs  to  a  miner, 
and  in  the  summer  is  usually  occupied  by  the  Governor ; 
but  he  is  not  there  just  now.  There  is  a  forest  of  birch- 
trees  attached  to,  or  forming  part  of,  the  property,  through 
which  the  road  from  Tomsk  runs.    These  trees  stand  very 


SOME  R  USSIAN  CUSTOMS.  1 4 1 

close  together  for  two  or  three  miles,  without  any  admixture 
of  other  trees,  and  many  of  them  are  heautiful  specimens 
of  the  weeping-hirch.  The  gronud  underneath  is  fairly 
carpeted  with  flowers,  hnt  poor  when  compared  with  what 
I  have  passed  over  further  eastward. 

19/^,  Sunday. — We  were  told  yesterday  that  the  steamer 
Mih  would  start  early  this  morning,  so  we  slept  on 
board  last  night ;  but  it  is  now  nearly  noon,  and  there  is  no 
appearance  yet  of  getting  up  steam.  Besides  ourselves,  there 
seems  to  be  but  one  cabin  passenger,  and  some  twenty  or 
thirty  men,  women,  and  children,  steerage  passengers.  We 
have  discovered  there  is  not  much  to  be  got  on  board  in  the 
way  of  eatables ;  so  my  companion,  Mr  G.,  has  gone  back  to 
Tomsk  (about  two  miles  distant)  to  seek  a  further  supply  of 
bread,  tea,  and  sugar.  These  Russians  are  queer  fellows. 
If  you  want  to  wash,  you  must  go  to  the  pump,  where  the 
steward  will  draw  and  pour  over  your  head,  hands,  and  face 
as  much  water  as  you  like,  but  no  vessel  is  ever  provided  to 
hold  water  in  which  you  may  wash  yourself.  The  dipper 
from  the  water-cask,  or  the  dipper  attached  to  the  pump,  is 
used  for  the  purpose.  I  am  not  badly  off  for  a  sleeping-place, 
my  cabin  being  twelve  feet  square  and  eight  feet  high,  being 
the  only  private  cabin  the  little  steamer  can  boast  of.  Mr 
6.  sleeps  in  the  main  cabin.  Had  our  carriage,  for  which  I 
paid  200  rubles  to  Mr  Grant  at  Kiachta,  been  at  all  equal 
to  the  journey,  we  should  probably  have  gone  on  by  land  to 
Tmnen,  but  it  is  so  rickety  we  could  not  trust  it  any  fxirther, 
60  I  have  left  it  to  be  sold  by  Mr  C,  who  has  kindly 
undertaken  to  look  out  for  a  purchaser.  We  have  received 
great  kindness  from  Mr  and  Mrs  C.  during  our  stay  in 
Tomsk,  and  their  attention  has  made  the  time  pass  quickly. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

Driftwood — Precaationi  against  escape  of  exiles— Fishing — ^Villages— Birch-wood 
fuel— HRilstorm— Eternal  card-playing— River   Irtish — Birds— A  seal— Fsim 
— Tobolsk — A  Polish  gentleman  amnestied — Bugs— The  bishop — On  the  rotd 
again— Tumen — Corduroy  roads— Crops  of  rye,  oats,  barley — Thriving  TiUagM^ 
Passports — Polish  exiles— Criminals — Treatment  of  exiles — '^Colonuts,**  thior 
occupations— Tanneries — Wardropper^s    (a   Scotchman)   mannfaetory— Taitsr 
town— Salmon— Windmills — Yekaterinburg — Mr  Tate,  engideer—Cvold mines- 
Mr  Wilkinson  in  charge  of  cotton-mills — Paper-mills — Ironworks — Great  wealth 
in  gold,  silver,  iron,  and  copper  of  the  Ural — Mint — Oold  mines  of  Bereiov— 
Abolition  of  serfdom— Population — Tarantass — Divisorial  line  between  Asia  and 
Europe — Russian  Church  invented  Purgatory  in  1853— Lines  of  ezilee,  men, 
women,  and  children — Underground  caverns— Perm— On  board  the  Permeii*— 
Good  larder — Warm  weather— Steamboat  company — Pine  woods — Russian  peen* 
liarities — Polite  beggars — Fish  abundant,  potatoes,  not  much  fruit — ^Boots,  no 
shoes — Cucumbers,  staple  food  of  Russians— The  Volga — Nigne-Novgorod,  the 
great  fair — To  Moscow  by  train — Vladimir— Old  mode  of  ablution — &e  Kran- 
lin,  the  Saviour's  Gate,  churches,  monasteries,  military  works,  artillery,  Isjqp 
cannon,  great  bell,  crown  jewels — Fine  view  of  city —St  Petenbox^. 

19 1 A. — We  embarked  on  board  the  Irtish  the  eveniDg 
before  last,  but  did  not  get  fairly  away  until  8  p.m.  yesterday. 
At  5  P.M.  we  took  one  barge  in  tow,  and  carried  her  down  the 
river  clear  of  the  shallows,  and  then  returned  for  another; 
and  it  was  8  p.m.  before  we  were  fairly  off  with  both  barges 
in  tow.  We  go  through  the  water  about  four  knots,  and 
over  the  ground  about  eight.  It  is  now  noon,  and  we  must 
be  120  miles  below  Tomsk.  Height  of  river  here  above  the 
sea,  350  feet.  The  range  of  temperature  the  last  twenty- 
four  hours,  70''  to  80°.  So  soon  as  we  were  fairly  under  way, 
going  down  stream  with  both  barges  in  tow,  the  captain  rang 
the  ship's  bell,  which  was  the  signal  for  the  crews  and 
passengers  to  cross  themselves  and  shake  hands  with  each 
other;  they  might  also  have  mumbled  a  short  prayer  for  a  lucky 
passage.  Under  similar  circumstances,  our  fashion  would 
have  been  three  hearty  cheers.  At  the  place  of  embarkation 
the  Tom  must  be  three-quarters  of  a  mile  wide,  and  so  fiar 
it  has  kept  its  breadth,  with  an  occasional  narrowing  to  half 
a  mile.  The  banks  may  be  some  fifteen  or  twenty  feet  high, 
and  the  line  of  driftwood  shows  the  river  to  be  some  seven 
or  eight  feet  higher  than  it  is   at  present     At  the  last 


LEAVE  TOMSK— PRAYERS.  143 

moment  several  more  cabin  passengers  came  on  board ;  we 
are  eight  altogether  now,  I  think.  A  cabin,  which  I  thought 
yesterday  was  the  captain's,  has  been  cleared  out,  and  Mr  G. 
has  taken  possession  of  it.  I  went  on  deck  at  half-past  two 
this  morning,  and  found  we  were  alongside  the  bank 
embarking  wood  (birch)  for  fuel.  I  fancied  we  were  at  first 
aground,  despite  all  the  crossings  and  prayers,  and  was  glad 
to  find  it  otherwise.  The  river  is  tortuous,  but  the  general 
direction  of  it  until  we  near  Tumen  is  N.  by  W.  As  far  as 
we  have  come,  the  trees  extend  down  to  the  water's  edge,  and 
the  only  habitations  we  have  yet  seen  are  a  few  woodcutters' 
or  fishermen's  huts.  Birch  prevails.  Wind  north-westerly 
and  weather  cloudy. 

20^. —  So  far  to-day  is  but  a  repetition  of  yesterday.  Fine 
weather.  The  boat  moving  along  about  eight  knots  over  the 
ground,  and  the  banks  of  the  river  low  and  covered  with 
wood  to  the  river's  side.  Temperature  ranging  between  65® 
and  72^  Height  by  aneroid,  150  feet.  Stopped  this  morning 
for  three  hours  opposite  a  small  village  to  take  in  birch- 
wood.  Mr  G.  deprived  of  his  cabin  to-day,  to  be  occupied  by 
two  officers  who  have  come  to  the  steamer  from  one  of  the 
barges.  The  captain  states  that  forty  rubles  (which  we  have 
paid)  is  the  price  of  one  cabin  only ;  this  is  a  doubtful 
statement  Bought  some  eggs  to-day  on  shore  and  an  old 
cock ;  the  latter,  which  we  are  turning  into  soup,  cost  twenty* 
copecks,  and  the  former  a  copeck  each.  Very  little  disposi- 
tion shown  on  board  this  steamer  to  help  or  do  anything  for 
passengers — that  is,  for  English  passengers. 

*2.\st. — The  banks  of  the  river  still  low ;  poplars  abundant^ 
passed  many  villages  in  which  horned  cattle  and  horses  seem 
to  be  numerous.  Stopped  at  eleven  last  night  to  replenish  our 
stock  of  wood,  and  we  have  now  one  of  the  barges  alongside 
giving  us  a  further  quantity.  The  current,  I  should  say,  runs 
here  at  the  rate  of  four  miles  an  hour,  and  our  pace  through 
the  water  may  also  be  about  other  four  miles.  The  tempera- 
ture ranges  the  last  twenty-four  hours  in  my  cabin  between 
70**  and  78^  Weather  cloudy,  with  a  sprinkling  of  rain  at 
one  time  this  morning.  The  river  over  a  mile  broad  in  some 
parts,  and  in  the  narrowest  never  less  than  a  quarter  of  a 
mile,  and  that  only  where  two  channels  are  formed  by  the 


144  DESCRIPTION  OF  STEAMER. 

interposition  of  an  island :  the  water  very  muddy ;  at  Tomsk 
it  was  quite  clear.  The  mud  is  no  doubt  brought  down  by 
the  small  streams  that  feed  the  Tom.  I  find  that  I  shall 
soon  tire  of  this  inactive  life  on  board  ship,  particularly  as 
the  behaviour  of  those  who  have  it  in  their  power  to  make 
us  comfortable  is  boorish  in  the  extreme,  and  of  whose  lan- 
guage I  hardly  understand  a  word.  I  already  long  for  a 
renewal  of  postal  land  travelling,  and  intend  to  disembark 
at  Tobolsk,  and  proceed  from  thence  by  land  to  Tumen.  So 
f 8ur  as  I  can  make  out,  the  distance  is  about  280  versts. 
Aneroid  height  of  river,  fifty  feet  only.  This  boat  is  180  feet 
long  and  23  feet  beam,  paddle.  Amidships  her  deck  must 
be  at  least  from  three  to  five  feet  higher  than  it  is  at  the  stem 
or  stern,  thus  giving  her  the  appearance  of  being  hogged  or 
broken-backed.  At  the  bow  her  gunwale  cannot  be  more 
than  five  feet  above  the  water,  and  at  the  stern  four  feet,  whilst 
amidships  it  is  seven  feet  at  least.  No  doubt  this  mode  of  build- 
ing has  been  adopted  in  order  to  obtain  a  greater  diameter 
for  the  paddles  without .  immersing  them  too  deeply  in  the 
water.  She  is  of  wood,  and  cannot  draw  more  than  three  feet 
water,  perhaps  not  quite  so  much.  She  has  one  mast  and 
yard  for  the  purpose  of  hoisting  signals,  and  at  the  masthead 
figures  a  cross.  Her  engines  are  roughly  made,  and  may  be 
eighty  horse-power,  for,  freed  from  the  barges,  they  drive  her 
through  the  water  ten  knots  easily.  The  barges  we  are  tow- 
ing must  be  over  200  feet  long,  and,  laden  as  they  are,  they 
show  a  side  of  more  than  eight  feet  clear.  On  deck  they  are 
railed  round  to  the  height  of  eight  feet,  and  the  oblong  air  or 
port  holes  in  their  sides  are  covered  with  an  iron  grating  on 
the  outside.  They  are  often  employed  in  bringing  exiles 
from  Tumen  to  Tomsk,  and  hence  the  meaning  of  this 
precautionary  security.  They  are  clumsy-looking  wooden 
craft,  with  rudders  ten  feet  wide,  and  require  three  men  at 
the  helm  to  steer  them. 

%%d. — Stopped  three  hours  this  morning  to  take  in  wood 
Passed  several  villages  last  evening,  and  one  steamer  towing 
a  barge  bound  to  Tomsk.  A  good  many  small  fishing-canoes 
offering  fish,  but  we  did  not  stop  for  it.  With  little  devi- 
ation, 80  far  as  we  have  come,  the  banks  of  the  river  on  both 
sides  are  some  ten  to  twenty  feet  above  the  present  water- 


MONOTONOUS  JOURNEY,  14S 

level ;  and  from  the  driftwood  on  the  banks,  I  should  say  the 
riTer,  from  its  greatest  height,  must  have  fallen  about  seven 
feet    The  course  of  the   river   is  very  tortuous  and   very 
irregnlar,  so  that,  although  the  banks  are  so  low,  they  present 
varied  scenery,  but  covered  more  or  less  all  the  way  with 
wood.    During  the  last   twenty-four   hours   the   river   has 
widened  out  in  many  parts  to  full  three  miles.     Bange  of 
temperature,  65**  to   72'',   and  bright  weather.      Height  of 
the  river,  100  feet  nearly  below  the  index.      We  must  be 
going  through  the  water  from  five  to  six  knots,  the  current 
numing  at  the  rate  of  four  knots,  so  that  over  the  ground 
wc  cannot  be  going  less  than  ten  knots.     I  was    in  error 
•bout  the  reason  for  dislodging  Mr  G.     He  was  put  out  of 
lu«  cabin  to  acconmiodate  a  servant  of  our  only  cabin  pas- 
senger, who  has  the  whole  general  cabin  to  himself,  a  very 
loobbish-looking  individual. 

23rf,  Tuxm. — We  have  not  stopped  this  twenty-four  hours 
fiirther  than  to  haul  one  of  the  barges  alongside  to  take  from 
ker  a  supply  of  wood.  Our  rate  of  speed  continues,  a  good 
bead  of  steam  being  kept  up.  No  alteration  in  the  character 
of  the  river-banks.  Passed  the  mouths  of  what  appeared  to 
be  hu*ge  streams  running  into  the  Tom.  Passed  also  many 
villages  and  several  fishing-canoes.  The  weather  continues 
very  fine,  with  the  temperature  ranging  between  70°  and 
80°.  Aneroid,  no  alteration.  Full  moon.  This  is  our 
fifth  day  out,  and  we  ought  to  be  now  nearly,  if  not  quite, 
balf-way  to  Tobolsk,  where  we  hope  to  leave  this  disagree- 
tbie  boat 

24/A. — Our  monotonous  journey  continues,  with  the  sole 

interruption  of  stopping  to  take  in  birch- wood  fuel.     We 

were  at  this  work  alongside  the  bank,  where  there  was  but  a 

single  hut,  for  nearly  seven  hours  early  this  morning.    Some 

rain  has  fallen,  and  a  very  heavy  hailstorm.     The  weather 

looks   still  unsettled.     Temperature,  70°    to    80°.     Aneroid 

falling.     No  change  in  the  scenery.    Some  parts  of  the  river 

through  which  we  passed  the  last  twenty-four  hours  have 

spread   out  to  seven  or   eight  miles.      To  all  appearance 

we  are  now  on  an  arm  of  the  Tom,  not  so  wide  by  a  good  deal 

IB  the  river  we  have  hitherto  been  upon.     Fir-trees  line  a 

portion  of  the  right  bank  of  the  river  now,  whilst  only  pop- 

K 


1 46  CARD-PLA  YING— IRTISH. 

lars  and  willows  are  seen  on  the  opposite  bank.  We  failed 
yesterday  in  an  attempt  to  obtain  a  supply  of  eggs  from  the 
shore,  made  whilst  the  boat  was  taking  in  a  supply  of 
wood.  A  steamer  bound  to  Tomsk  passed  us  early  in  the 
morning.  She  had  in  tow  two  barges,  one  of  them  with 
a  number  of  passengers,  probably  criminals  from  Bossia 
on  their  way  to  Eastern  Siberia.  Card-playing  seems  to 
be  a  national  institution  in  Siberia.  The  crew  and  the 
steward  of  this  boat  usually  pass  three  or  four  hours  at  it 
every  day. 

25^i4,  noon. — Very  warm  to-day.  Temperature  in  my  caWn 
now  86°.  We  have  had  some  rain  and  haU  during  the  last 
twenty-four  hours,  with  light  and  variable  winds.  We  hate 
now  turned  the  corner,  and  are  making  our  .way  against  tlie 
current  on  the  Irtish,  taking  us  to  Tobolsk.  The  borders  of 
the  river  continue  low,  with  an  occasional  highish  bluff; 
findiDg  bottom  as  we  go  along  in  some  places  with  a  long 
pole  (which  represents  the  sounding-lead  and  line)  at  eight 
feet.  Biver  very  tortuous,  and  many  sand-spits  in  it ;  the 
width  considerably  lessened.  Aneroid  gone  down  two-tenths. 
Stopped  yesterday  afternoon  for  a  couple  of  hours,  or  rather 
hauled  up  one  of  the  barges  alongside,  and  took  from  her  a 
supply  of  wood,  partly  fir  and  birch.  This  dreamy  way  of 
passing  the  time  does  not  suit  after  having  been  for  so  many 
days  accustomed  to  the  break-neck  devil-may-care  driving 
of  the  Siberian  yemshicks ;  during  which,  though  the  pace 
occasionally  dangerous,  the  pleasurable  excitement  attending 
it  pretty  well  drowns  all  fear. 

26M. — We  are  now  on  the  river  Irtish,  with  a  current 
against  us  of  three  to  four  koots.  Our  course  has  been  for 
the  last  thirty-six  hours  south.  This  river  must  have  joined 
the  Obi  thirty-six  hours  ago,  when  we  first  found  the  current 
against  us,  and  with  the  Tom  went  off  in  a  northerly  direc- 
tion to  pour  their  waters  into  the  Frozen  Ocean.  In  the  Obi, 
before  we  encountered  this  adverse  current,  we  must  have 
been  going  faster  than  I  calculated  on  ;  indeed,  the  distance 
run  shows  that  we  must  have  been  making  something  like 
300  miles  a  day.  Now,  with  a  strong  current  against  us, 
we  are  making  five  and  a  half  to  six  knots  at  least;  for  the 
captain  says,  though  we  were  431  versts  from  Tobolsk  this 


J 


VILLAGES  MORE  FREQUENT.  147 

morning,  we  shall  arrive  there  at  noon  on  the  28  th.  No 
alteration  in  the  height  of  the  banks  of  the  river.  All  allu- 
vial ;  not  a  stone  to  be  seen  anywhere  ;  and  evidently  they 
are  being  extensively  washed  away  every  year.  A  good 
many  islands  in  the  river,  and  many  incipient  ones  forming. 
Stopped  this  morning  to  take  in  wood,  which  occupied  us 
fidly  four  hours.  Took  advantage  of  the  stoppage  to  re- 
plenish our  larder  by  a  purchase  of  eggs  and  milk.  The 
average  width  of  this  river  may  be  nearly  half  a  mile  ;  the 
banks  thickly  covered  with  the  willow,  the  poplar,  the  alder, 
the  aspen,  and  the  birch.  Wind  right  aft,  which  helps  us. 
Temperature  ranging  between  75°  and  80^  A  good  many 
women  employed  to-day  in  bringing  wood  on  board — stout, 
strong-looking  lasses  all  of  them. 

27£i,  noon. — Brought  the  barge  alongside  yesterday  even^ 
ing,  and  took  from  her  a  supply  of  wood,  birch  principally. 
Whenever  we  stop,  the  barges  take  in  deck-loads  of  wood. 
In  dropping  the  launch  astern  after  we  had  done  with  her, 
by  some  mishap — probably  by  going  ahead  with  the  steamer 
too  fast  and  too  suddenly — the  tow-rope  broke,  and  caused  us 
ft  delay  of  an  hour.  Small  villages  more  frequent,  and  in 
some  parts  men  and  women  on  the  strand,  whose  habitations 
are  quite  hidden  from  us.  One  party  was  busy,  as  we  passed, 
hauling  an  extensive  net.  With  the  exception  of  an  occa- 
sional hill  of  sand  bordering  the  right  bank  of  the  river  for 
a  few  hundred  yards  covered  with  firs,  the  banks  more  or 
leas  on  both  sides  are  about  the  same  height  as  heretofore, 
say  from  ten  to  twenty  feet,  and  covered  with  willows.  For 
the  fir  tribe  there  must  be  rising  ground.  The  only  river- 
birds  we  have  seen  are  ducks  and  sandpipers,  and  these  not 
in  great  numbers.  A  few  gulls,  by-the-by,  have  also  made 
their  appearance.  We  meet  with  a  cleared  tract  of  land 
occasionally,  and  see  a  few  ricks  of  hay  ;  but  in  general,  as 
fiir  as  the  eye  can  reach,  the  whole  country  is  thickly  covered 
with  timber.  Fine  weather ;  temperature  ranging  between 
72**  and  82**.  Aneroid  rising  a  little,  showing  the  river  to 
be  about  100  feet  above  the  index.  Now  aud  then  we  get 
bottom  with  our  sounding-pole  at  eight  feet  on  sharp  bends 
where  sand-spits  have  formed,  but  everywhere  else  there 
would  seem  to  be  deep  water. 


148  TOBOLSK, 

29>th^  noon. — Fine  weather  and  a  fair  wind.  A  seal  near 
the  boat  last  evening.  The  country  more  populated.  Faniw 
are  numerous  and  cattle  abundant  Many  patches  of  cleared 
land,  and  ricks  of  hay  pretty  plentiful.  Here  and  there  we 
pass  a  cliff  (sand  apparently)  perhaps  150  feet  high,  generally 
covered  with  firs.  The  banks,  however,  on  the  whole,  are 
low.  Temperature  ranging  between  70°  and  80° ;  aneroid,  150 
above  index.  Very  little  difference  in  the  general  width  of 
the  river  ;  it  may  be  said  to  be  about  half  a  mile  wide  on  an 
average  ever  since  we  entered  it. 

30^^,    Tobolsk. — No    one    but    ourselves    on    board   the 
Irtish  could  speak  a  word   of  any  language  but  Russian, 
of  which  we  knew  very  little.     She  was  a  steamer  withont 
either  a  clock,  a  watch,  a  chart,  or  a  map  on  board.    The 
captain  and  his  crew  were  pretty  well  hail-fellow-well-met 
The  crew  spent  many  hours  every  day  playing  cards  on  deck, 
whilst  the  captain  did  the  same  thing  in  the  cabin  when  he 
could  find  anybody  to  play  with^  which  he  did  occasionally 
by  inviting  on  board  his  steamer  three  passengers  from  one 
of  the  barges  we  had  in  tow,  when  they  invariably  made  a 
night  of  it,  and  sometimes  two — splaying  all  night  and  half 
the  day  besides.     These  Siberian  Russians  are  queer  fellows ; 
even  in  their  dress   they  are  peculiar,  wearing  their  shirts 
outside  their  other  clothes.     Our  captain  might  always  be 
seen  with  a  red  merino  shirt  on,  reaching  from  his  neck 
down  to  his  heels ;  he  was  a  large  man,  with  the  figure  of  a 
prize  ox ;  and  as  he  moved  about  the  steamer  with  his  red 
shirt  on,  did  not  look  very  unlike  that  animal  covered  with 
blood.     The  crew  all  wore  shirts  of  Manchester  small-pattern 
printed  cotton  over  their  other  clothes,  fastened  round  their 
waists  by  a  leathern  belt  inlaid  or  studded  with  metal ;  and 
when  not  dressed  in  a  shirt,  they  used  to  wear  the  ever- 
lasting grey  greatcoat  reaching  down  to  their  heels.     All 
Russians  wear  long  boots,  the  women  almost  as  much  as  the 
men.     There  were  two  officers,  passengers  on  board  one  of 
our  barges,  who  used  to  come  on  board  our  steamer  for  a 
bout  at  cards  occasionally  with  the  captain  and  our  cabin 
passenger.     The  one  was  a  fat  major,  the  other  a  young 
man,  a  doctor,  perhaps,  who  usually  wore  the  greatcoat ;  and 
from  the  peeps  one  got  of  the  skin  of  different  parts  of  his 


TUMEN—B  UGS.  1 49 

body,  I  don't  think  I  can  be  far  out  in  saying  that  the  great- 
coat was  the  only  covering  he  wore. 

August  Istj  Tumetu — Daring  a  walk  about  Tobolsk  on 
the  evening  of  our  arrival,  we  ran  against  some  Polish 
gentlemen,  one  of  whom — Mr  Y. — addressed  me  in  French. 
In  a  few  minutes  I  heard  from  him  that  one  of  his  country- 
men, who  had  just  been  amnestied,  in  so  far  that  he  had 
permission  to  return  to  Russia  proper,  though  not  to  Poland 
— M.  I.  M. — was  about  to  leave  Tobolsk  for  Russia,  and 
that  he  would  be  glad  to  join  us  in  the  journey.  A  few 
minutes  afterwards  brought  us  face  to  face  with  the  amnes- 
tied gentleman  himself,  and  we  were  not  long  in  arranging 
to  travel  together,  and  that  we  would  start  for  Tumen  at 
2  A.M.  We  then  went  to  our  inn,  put  our  traps  all 
straight,  and  lay  down  in  the  vain  hope  of  getting  a  couple 
of  hours'  sleep.  I  soon  felt  that  I  had  some  visitors  about 
me,  and  Mr  G.  (who  could  usually  sleep  even  with  his  head 
in  a  bucket  of  water)  was  very  restless.  We  got  on  our 
legs  and  looked  about ;  the  wrappers  we  had  over  us  and 
the  pillows  were  covered  with  bugs  I  There  were  hundreds 
of  them  coming  out  of  holes  in  the  loose  paper  on  the  walls, 
and  finding  their  way  to  our  bunks.  Sleep,  then,  was  out 
of  the  question ;  so  we  remained  up  to  await  the  coming  of 
oar  Polish  acquaintance.  Sure  enough,  a  little  after  one, 
accompanied  by  many  friends,  he  made  his  appearance. 
We  were  to  have  had  two  carriages,  as  our  luggage  was  too 
much  for  one ;  but  the  postmaster  could  only  give  us  horses 
for  one,  the  bishop  and  his  retinue  having  a  little  before 
made  a  clean  sweep  of  the  stables.  Well,  what  was  to  be 
done?  Anything  was  better  than  to  remain  and  be 
eaten  up  by  bugs ;  so  we  determined  to  start  all  in  one 
carriage,  and  take  our  chance  of  getting  another  at  the  first 
station  on  the  road.  Our  friends  went  zealously  to  work 
to  stow  away  the  luggage,  and  they  accomplished  it ;  and 
we  three  got  in  on  the  top  of  it.  At  three  o'clock  we  were 
away,  and  we  travelled  without  stopping  further  than  to 
change  horses  until  noon  to-day,  when  we  came  into  Tumen 
after  a  ride  of  thirty-three  hours,  in  which  time  we  accom- 
plished the  258  versts  that  separate  Tobolsk  from  Tumen, 
notwithstanding  the  scores  of  bad  and  corduroy  roads  we 


I50  GRAIN  CROPS. 

encouDtered.    We  have  already  hired  a  comfortable  carriage 
to  go  on  to  Yekaterinburg,  and  paid  onr  fare  here  for  the 
whole  journey — which  is  a  great  comfort  to  be  able  to  do, 
instead  of  paying  for  the  stage  only  on  arrival  at  the  station, 
which  we  have  hitherto  done.     The  distance  is  306  versts, 
and  we  have  paid  for  the  whole  affair  forty-two  rubles  (aboat 
£5,  10s.)    The  road  all  the  way  between  these  two  cities — 
Tumen    and   Tobolsk — ^lies  over   flat  ground,  and  in  wet 
weather  must  be  very  bad  travelling ;  and  hence  the  great 
amount  of  corduroy  road,  almost  the  only  rough-and-ready 
mode  easily  adopted  of  getting  footing  over  swampy  ground 
where  stone  is  not  to  be  met  with. 

On  leaving  Tobolsk  we  crossed  the  principal  arm  of  the 
Irtish,  just   where   it  sweeps   round  some    high  tableland 
towards  the  north,  leaving  its  western  direction.     We  came 
upon  it  once  more  on  our  journey,  and  twice  we  crossed  the 
Tobol,  which  joins  the  Irtish  close  to  Tobolsk,  and  with  it 
flows  away  northwards  until  it  becomes  lost  in  the  great 
river  Obi,  and  ultimately  in  the  Frozen  Ocean.     By  this  mode 
of  landing  at  Tobolsk,  and  taking  the  land  route  to  Tumen, 
we  saved  some  three  days  at  least,  and  the  whole  journey, 
though  through  a  flat  country,  was  interesting.     The  greater 
part  of  the  land,  for  a  considerable  depth  on  both  sides  of  the 
highway,  was  under  crops — rye,  oats,  and  barley;  not  a  single 
field  of  wheat,  I  think.     Indeed,  the  soil  is  very  light  and 
loamy,  and  better  adapted  for  rye  and  oats  than  for  wheat 
Men  and  women — the  latter  in  greater  numbers — ^were  em- 
ployed reaping  rye  ;  and  I  could  not  but  remark  the  nice 
tidy  sheaves   in  which   it  was   tied  up,  and  the  complete 
covering  of  the  shook,  protecting  it  from  rain,  by  a  large 
sheaf  spread  out  over  the  shook  with  the  heads  of  grain 
downwards.     The  rye  was  clean  looking  (the  straw  I  mean), 
and  of  a  beautiful  golden  hue ;  but  all  their  grain  crops— oats, 
barley,  and  rye — were  very  short  in  the  straw,  and  otherwise 
light,  the  oats  particularly  so;  not,  I  think,  more  than  would 
be  considered  half  a  crop  with  us.     They  manure  here  for 
these  crops.    This  is  not  the  case  in  Eastern  Siberia,  though 
the  rye  I  saw  growing  there  three  weeks  ago  was  some  of  it 
six   feet   high.       The    soil,    I   should    say,   is    very   much 
richer  or  less  exhausted  in  the  east  than  hereabouts.     Large 


POST-OFFICE.  151 

villages  meet  yon  now  at  every  turn  between  this  and  Tobolsk, 
and  comfortable-looking,  thriving  places  they  are.  Tobolsk 
is  an  interesting  town.  The  lower  town  is  on  a  flat  on 
the  right  bank  of  the  Irtish,  whilst  the  upper  town  is  on 
tableland  some  240  feet  above  the  lower  town,  which  of 
conrse  it  completely  overlooks.  There  are  two  plank  roads 
(the  one  with  steps)  which  lead  between  high  banks  of  earth 
to  the  upper  town.  In  a  public  garden  on  the  hill  is  a  grey 
marble  monument .  erected  to  Yermak  some  thirty  years 
ago.  The  gardens  are  planted  with  birch,  cedar,  and  *fir,  and 
other  trees ;  the  lime  and  the  willow  are  there,  and  other 
trees  also.  Most  of  the  streets  in  both  towns  are  laid  out  at 
right  angles  to  each  other.  The  population  is  13,000.  It  is 
an  antiquated  place,  and  very  few  buildings  are  in  progress 
of  erection.  Its  commerce  now  is  little  or  nothing.  I  went 
to  the  police-office  to  get  my  padderoshna  visced,  and  had  to 
wait  there  for  at  least  an  hour.  The  chief  was  not  in  the 
office  when  I  arrived,  but  he  came  in  a  few  minutes  afterwards. 
My  padderoshna  was  put  before  him  ;  but  what  with  bad 
pens  and  no  ink  in  the  stand,  and  the  number  of  grey-coated 
gentlemen  who  had  something  to  say  before  they  were  de- 
spatched, a  long  time  elapsed  before  the  copying  into  a  book 
of  the  particulars  of  the  document  was  commenced  ;  and  just 
as  the  great  man  appeared  inclined  to  despatch  me,  a  lady 
dressed  in  Parisian  style  walked  in  and  asked  if  there  was 
any  letter  for  her.  My  heart  sunk  within  me  as  I  saw  the 
chief  take  from  a  drawer  of  the  table  at  which  he  was  writing 
a  bundle  of  letters,  a  hundred  at  least,  looking  very  old  and 
dirty.  He  was  considerate,  however,  and  he  handed  the 
letters  to  an  old  sergeant  to  look  them  over,  who  seemed  to 
have  considerable  difficulty  in  deciphering  the  addresses.  The 
lady  was  still  waiting  the  result  of  the  old  sergeant's  exami- 
nation when  I  left  the  office.  So  the  police-master  and  the 
old  soldier  formed  the  staff  of  the  postal  establishment  in  the 
once  flourishing  city  and  capital  of  Western  Siberia!  There 
are  some  fourteen  or  fifteen  good-sized  Greek  churches  in 
Tobolsk;  and  on  the  hill,  towering  over  the  lower  town,  stand 
the  bishop's  palace  and  the  cathedral,  the  latter  overlooking 
all  other  buildings.  Some  hundreds  of  Polish  exiles  reside 
in  the  town,  and  some  thousands  in  the  province.     On  look- 


1 52  POLISH  EXILES. 

ing  at  them  loitering  about,  half  or  wholly  idle  from  nece^- 
sity,  I  have  often  thought  it  a  pity  the  Russian  Grovernmeot 
does  not  get  rid  of  them  by  allowing  permission  for  them  \io 
emigrate  to  China,  India,  or  the  United  States,  or  anywhere 
else,  in  fact,  with  the  exception  of  a  return  to  Russia  and 
Poland ;  but  this,  I  suppose,  might  interfere  with  the  desire 
the  Government  have  of  doing  all  they  can  to  populate 
Siberia.     All  criminals,  on  their  first  arrival  in  Siberia,  take 
a  turn  at  the  **Travaux  forces ; "  but  I  was  told  by  some  of  the 
political  prisoners  that  they  seldom  or  ever  did  much  wort 
there.     The  last  outbreak  in  Poland  brought,  they  say,  36,000 
of  them  to  Siberia.     My  travelling  companion's  grandfeither 
died  an  exile  in  Siberia;  his  father  was  here  for  many  years; 
he  himself  has  been  here  for  five  years  an  exile ;  and  in  all 
probability,  he  says,  the  same  fate  awaits  his  son  (a  boy  of 
nine).     We  lodged  in  Tumen  in  a  poor  place  kept  by  a  Pole, 
and  there  we  saw  many  of  our  acquaintance's  friends.     The 
Poles  hold  together  in  this  land  of  their  exile,  and  help  each 
other  all  they  can.    When  at  the  mines  (on  their  first  arrival), 
or  employed  on  other  "  Travaux  forces,"  they  receive  an  allow- 
ance of  two  poods  of  meal  and  three  and  a  half  rubles  a  month 
in  money  for  their  subsistence  ;  but  after  three  years  they  gene- 
rally cease  from  forced  labour,  and  are  allowed  their  freedom 
under  certain  police  restrictions,  and  are  then  called  colonists, 
and  left  to  find  their  own  living.     And  so  it  is  that  you  have 
men  who  were  landed  proprietors  in  their  own  country,  here,  in 
Siberian  towns,  keeping  little  huxter-shops,  bakers,  driving 
street-cabs,  keeping  hotels,  brewing  beer,  making  candles, 
photographers — employed,  in  fact,  in  useful  business;  but  it  is 
only  those  who  have  lost  their  all  by  confiscation  or  otherwise 
— ^who  are,  in  fact,  obliged  to  labour  in  order  to  live — ^who  seem 
to  work.     Those  who  receive  help  from  home  do  nothing. 
Some  restrictions  are  placed  upon  Poles  becoming  teachers  of 
languages  or  instructing  the  youth  of  Siberia,  for  which  they 
are  so  much  more  competent  than  any  Russians  found  here. 
Still  a  good  many  of  them  are  employed  sub  rosa  in  that  way. 
They  are  the  only  men  whom  I  have  found  in  Siberia  who 
could  speak  any  tongue  but  Russian;  and  so  I  have  constantly 
been  mixed  up  with  them. 
2d  to  5tAy   Yekaterinburg. — Tumen  is  prettily  situated  on 


TUMEN.  IS3 

the  high  banks  of  the  Tora,  and  is  the  limit  of  river  naviga- 
tion for  steamers  from  Tomsk  in  this  direction.  The  distance 
between  the  two  cities  is  about  3000  versts.  It  contains 
25,000  inhabitants.  The  houses  are  still  principally  of  wood, 
hnt  the  number  of  brick  houses  is  increasing,  and  in  a  few 
years  brick  will  entirely  supersede  wood  in  building,  for  the 
cost  of  bringing  timber  to  the  town,  as  the  land  becomes 
cleared  everywhere  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  daily 
becomes  greater.  Well-cultivated  fields  cover  a  large  tract  of 
land  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Tura.  Tanneries  are  in  great  num- 
ber—small establishments,  but  in  the  aggregate  they  must  turn 
out  a  large  quantity  of  leather.  The  process,  they  tell  me, 
followed  of  turning  a  raw  hide  into  leather  occupies  two  and 
a  half  months.  The  bark  of  the  salix  is  used,  as  there  is  no 
oak  here ;  the  leather  is  blackened  with  tar  from  the  birch. 
I  visited  a  Mr  Wardropper,  who,  with  his  family,  has  been 
established  many  years  in  Siberia  employed  in  engineering 
operations  and  in  building  steamers.  He  had  launched  one 
steamer  the  day  before  we  arrived  at  Tumen.  She  is  of  iron, 
180  feet  long  and  120  horse-power  engines,  drawing,  with 
fuel  on  board  sufficient  for  one  day's  consumption,  twenty- 
six  inches  water.  Cost  some  £7000  or  £8000.  Mr  War- 
dropper also  built  the  Irtxih  ten  years  ago^  in  which  I  made 
the  passage  from  Tomsk  to  Tobolsk.  His  son,  with  his  wife 
and  family  (Scotch),  are  with  him.  He  comes,  he  says, 
from  Denny's  yard  in  Dumbarton.  They  pressed  us  very 
hard  to  stay  a  day,  but  we  had  fixed  the  hour  for  starting, 
and  were  therefore  inexorable.  The  Tartar  town  lies  apart 
from  the  city,  some  miles  away  on  the  plain.  The  nelma,  a 
species  of  salmon  unknown  in  Europe,  is  found  in  the  Tara. 
Tmnen  contains  many  handsome  houses,  and  churches  are 
numerous ;  several  wide  streets,  unpaved,  with  a  raised 
wooden  trottoir.  The  views  from  many  parts  of  the  town, 
over  the  winding  river  and  the  cultivated  alluvial  flat,  is 
extensive,  for  the  town  stands  100  feet  at  least  above  the 
river.  There  seemed  to  be  no  end  to  the  number  of  wind- 
mills dotted  over  the  plain.  The  little  river  Tyumenka  runs 
through  the  town.  M.  M.,  an  exile  in  Siberia,  kindly 
accompanied  me  about  Tumen,  and  I  count  on  finding  his 
brother,  an  exile,  to  do  the  same  service  for  me  at  Yekaterin- 


1 54  YEKA  TERINB  URG. 

burg.  We  left  Tumen  at  7.30  p.m.  on  the  2d,  arrived  here 
at  Doon  OD  4th,  nearly  forty  hours  coming  306  versts.  The 
road  is  roagh  for  two-thirds  of  the  way  from  Tnmen,  per- 
fectly flat,  but  cordoroy,  which  jolted  considerably.  After- 
wards it  got  better,  and  we  were  enabled  to  travel  moie 
rapidly.  It  was  not  until  we  approached  Tekaterinbmg 
that  we  were  sensible  of  any  undulations  in  the  road. 

The  grain  is  not  so  forward  hereabouts  as  farther  eastward; 
still,  reaping  rye  had  commenced,  and  no  doubt  will  advance 
rapidly,  as  the  weather  is  bright  and  warm,  the  temperature 
ranging  in  the  shade  during  the  past  twenty- four  hours  from 
75**  to  80°.  Many  villages  are  met  with  on  this  line  of 
route,  and  the  quantity  of  cleared  land  is  very  much  greater 
than  I  have  before  noticed  anywhere  in  Siberia.  Came  upon 
the  Puishma  twice  in  the  course  of  our  route.  Yekaterin- 
burg, by  my  aneroid,  stands  850  feet  above  the  sea. 

Qtk. — Yesterday  visited  Mr  Tate,  who  was  formerly  in  the 
employment  of  the  Government  here.  He  built  their  mint 
some  years  ago,  as  well  as  a  machine-shop.  He  has  now  a 
machine-shop  of  his  own,  and  is  constantly  employed  in  the 
construction  of  small  steam-engines  for  the  gold-washing 
establishments  of  the  Ural.  We  go  with  him  to-day  on  a 
visit  to  the  mines.  Yesterday  we  drove  with  Mr  Tate  to  see 
a  Mr  Wilkinson  (a  Lancashire  operative,  I  should  say),  who 
is  in  charge  of  a  cotton-mill,  prettily  situated  about  four 
versts  from  Yekaterinburg,  belonging  to  a  rich  Russian,  M. 
Sebastian,  and  for  the  management  of  which,  he  told  me,  he 
receives  a  salary  of  4000  rubles.  The  first  mill  erected  was 
destroyed  by  fire  about  a  year  ago,  and  the  present  mill  is 
just  now  coming  into  work ;  and  we  yesterday  saw  hanging 
on  the  trees  in  his  garden  the  first  piece  of  cotton  cloth  pro- 
duced in  the  Ural.  It  was  a  piece  of  middling  quality  white 
shirting,  twenty-nine  inches  wide.  The  cotton  required  to 
keep  the  mill  agoing  will  come  principally  from  Bokhara  and 
Tashkend,  and  costs  now  Is.  a  pound.  He  is  prosecuting  an 
experiment  by  buying  up  the  rope  (flax  rope)  and  other  old 
flax  material,  cleaning  and  carding  it,  to  be  mixed  with  his 
cotton  fabric.  He  showed  me  some  prepared  for  spinning, 
which  really  had  a  beautiful  appearance.  He  seems  sanguine 
that  practically  it  can  be  made  useful  in  the  mill. 


YEKATERINBURG.  155 

The  neighbourhood  of  Yekaterinburg  is  studded  with 
paper-mills  and  ironworks,  the  motive  power  being  water, 
there  being  great  abundance,  and  pretty-looking  country- 
houses.  Everything  about  the  city  bears  the  stamp  of  consi- 
derable wealth,  the  product  of  the  gold,  silver,  iron,  and 
copper  mines  of  the  Ural  centring  in  this  city,  situated  on 
the  Isset.  We  are  located  at  the  postal  establishment,  where 
we  have  one  good  large  room,  for  which  we  pay  sixty-five 
copecks  a  day.  We  get  our  carriage  and  horses  at  the 
establishment,  which  makes  it  a  convenient  stopping-place 
for  M.  Our  Polish  friend,  M.  M.,  has  gone  on  with  two 
students  from  the  University  of  Kasan.  It  would  have  been 
inconvenient  for  him  to  have  remained  two  or  three  days  at 
Yekaterinburg,  as  the  police,  who  had  been  telegraphed  as 
to  his  movements,  were  looking  sharply  after  him,  and  raised 
difficulties  as  to  his  remaining.  We  may,  perhaps,  catch 
him  at  Perm.  The  work  here  of  cutting  rock-crystal  into 
seals  principally,  and  also  into  miniature  statuettes,  is  much 
Taunted,  and  perhaps  deservedly  so ;  but  I  find  this  sort  of 
work  to  be  very  dear.  The  topaz  and  the  amethyst  are  the 
principal  varieties  of  the  rock-crystal  found  here.  There  are 
also  jaspers  of  various  hues.  Among  the  varieties  of  silicious 
locks,  chiefly  used  for  the  purposes  of  sculpture,  are  the 
jasper,  agate,  jasper-breccia,  and  hard  porphyry.  The  grey 
niarble  quarries  are  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  Isset. 

7/A.— !-I  have  been  to-day  with  Mr  Tate  all  over  a  large 
establishment,   situated  about  three  versts  from  the    city, 
called  the  Verosetskey  Works,  belonging  to  M.  Sakolof,  for 
smelting  iron  ores  and  manufacturing  or  rolling  sheet  iron. 
I  spent  a  couple  of  hours  there,  and  witnessed  the  whole  pro- 
cess.   The  ores  come  from  a  distance,  and  produce  sixty  per 
cent,  of  iron.    The  fuel  used  in  smelting  is  wood,  fir  princi- 
pally.    The  sheet  iron  is  of  a  particularly  good  quality.     The 
sheets  measure  four  feet  eight  inches  by  two  feet  four  inches, 
and  are  of  an  average  weight  of  ten  pounds.     The  great  bulk 
of  the  houses  in  Yekaterinburg  have  the  roofs  covered  with 
this  sheet  iron,  painted  green,  which  costs,  when  hammered 
as  well  as  rolled,  three  and  a  half  rubles  a  pood  of  thirty- 
six  pounds ;  but  when  merely  rolled,  and  not  hammered,  the 
price  is  two  rubles  twenty  copecks.    This  paint  is  made  by 


iS6  VASE— GOLD  MINES— BEREZOV. 

grinding  np  small  bits  of  malachite,  useless  for  other  pi 
poseSy  and  then  grinding  it  a  second  time,  and  mixing 
intimately  with  oil.  My  attention  to-day  was  drawn  to 
iron  roof,  painted  with  this  carbonate  of  copper  twenty-f 
years  ago,  and  which  does  not  reqoire  repainting  yet ;  it 
still  of  a  dark  green  colour.  I  also  visited  the  mint ;  1 
the  work  is  stopped.  The  copper  coin  for  all  Russia  is  coil 
in  this  mint.  The  old  copper  coin  is  now  being  called 
and  a  new  copper  coin  to  take  its  place  is  being  issued, 
is  wlioUy  of  copper,  without  any  alloy,  which  would  sc 
to  be  a  mistake;  it  should  have  been  hardened.  In 
Government  workshop  we  visited  there  were  only  four  n 
at  work,  and  they  were  all  employed  upon  a  small  vase  o( 
posed  of  four  parts  destined  for  the  Emperor.  The  at 
they  were  cutting  was,  I  believe,  hard  porphyry ;  and  h 
enough  it  was,  for  one  of  the  men  had  been  employed 
cutting  the  pattern,  on  a  piece  not  larger  than  a  teacu} 
whole  year,  and  still  had  much  to  do  to  it  before  it  would 
completed.  This  man  was  receiving  seventy  copecks  a  < 
for  every  day  he  worked,  or  forty  copecks  a  day  for  every  < 
in  the  year,  Sundays  and  holidays  included ;  so  the  li' 
vase  would  cost  some  money  by  the  time  it  was  complet 
Another  man  had  been  six  months  at  work  on  a  portion 
the  vase  of  similar  size. 

Beautiful  weather.     Temperature  in  my  room  this  afl 
noon  83°;  at  five  A.M.,  70°. 

8^A  to  Wth, — On  board  the  steamer  Permean  on 
way  from  Perm  to  Nigne-Novgorod.  On  the  8th,  at  Ye 
terinburg,  I  paid  a  visit  to  the  gold  mines  at  Berei 
distant  from  the  city  fifteen  versts.  At  a  village  tl 
versts  before  arriving  at  the  mines  we  called  on  the  direc 
who  gave  us  some  account  of  the  working  of  the  mines, ; 
sent  a  man  with  us  to  instruct  the  managers  at  the  diffex 
workings  to  show  and  to  explain  to  us  what  was  doing.  ' 
mines  are  situated  on  undulating  ground  covered  with 
trees  of  recent  growth.  The  first  mine  we  came  to  wi 
new  one,  from  which  a  few  tons  of  quartz  had  been  taken 
lay  in  a  heap  at  the  mouth  of  the  mine,  waiting  until  a  stei 
crushing  mill  could  be  erected  for  turning  it  to  accoi 
We  went  down  the  new  shaft  by  a  good  flight  of  steps,  al 


GOLD  MINES.  iS7 

seventy  feet  deep  to  the  fronton,  which  was  about  ten  feet 
wide,  and  presented  a  mass  of  earth,  in  which  were  narrow 
teins  of  quartz.     There  was  no  gold,  tliey  told  us,  in  the 
snrroanding  earth,  nor  did  we  discover  any  in  our  search 
throngh  the  heap  of  quartz  that  had  been  extracted  from  the 
mine.    We  saw,  however,  some  rich  specimens  at  the  direc- 
tor*8,  taken  from  this  mine,  and  great  hopes  were  entertained 
u  to  the  result  of  the  workings.     From  this  quartz-yielding 
mine  we  proceeded  along  a  narrow  road  through  the  firs  to 
a  mine  where  preparations  were  being  made  for  pumping 
water  for  washing  the  gold-bearing  earth,  and  then  we  fol- 
lowed on  until  we  came  to  where  the  double  operation  of 
digging  and  washing  was  in  full  swing.     This  digging  was 
Bitnated  in  a  depression  in  the  plain.     From  the  surface — a 
deep  strata  of  leaf-mould — down  to  the  gold-bearing  earth  was 
a  depth  of  about  fifteen  feet,  and  here  the  leaf-mould  had 
been  carted  away,  and  the  gold  earth  had  been  worked  over 
a  snrface  of  about  six  acres,  and  the  produce  had  been  seven 
and  a  half  poods  (274  lbs.  English)  annually.     There  were, 
perhaps,  a  couple  of  hundred  people  employed  in  this  dig- 
ging, all  free  labour.     The  manager  had  some  earth  washed 
to  show  us  the  operation,  and  the  quality  of  the  pay-dirt ; 
and  it  took  only  a  small  quantity  of  dirt  and  about  five 
minutes'  work  for  one  man  to  produce  a  small  teaspoonful  of 
gold  in  grains.     The  director  told  me  the  gold  as  it  came 
from   the    diggings    was   in  purity  as  eighty-nine  to  one 
knndred.      This  granular  gold  is  melted  into  bars,  and  de- 
spatched to  St  Petersburg  in  three  sendings  annually.     Since 
tbe  abolition  of  serfdom  in  Russia,  the  Government  gets  but 
a  small  return  from  these  mines,  the  cost  of  working  them 
being  double  what  it  used  to  be,  the  workmen  earning  now 
forty  oopecks  a  day  instead  of  seventeen,  which  they  formerly 
received :  in  fact,  a  pood  of  gold  (thirty-six  lbs.)  now  leaves 
net  profit  to  the  Government  only  about  2000  rubles.     The 
truth  is,  that  from  these  mines  in  the  Ural  Mountains,  as 
well  as  those  of  Eastern  Siberia,  individual  proprietors  draw 
great  wealth,  whilst  the  Government  derives  but  little  advan- 
tage, and  this  result  is  attributable,  in  a  great  measure,  to 
peculation  ;  so  that  the  Gx)vernment,  I  am  told,  is  about  to 
transfer  the  working  of  the  mines  entirely  to  individual 


iS8    DIVISION  BETWEEN  EUROPE  AND  ASIA. 

enterprise.     We  were  treated  with  great  courtesy  by  the 
director  of  these  mines  and  the  managers  of  the  several  work- 
ings we  visited,  and  returned  to  Yekaterinburg  in  the  even- 
ing in  time  to  get  away  for  Perm  at  10  p.m.     Mp  Tate,  from 
whom  I  received  much  kindness^  saw  us  off,  and  rendered  us 
good  service  up  to  the  hour  of  our  departure.    Embarked  again 
in  the  tarantass  we  had  hired  at  Yekaterinburg  for  five  and 
a  half  rubles  to  take  us  all  the  way  to  Perm  without  chang- 
ing.    I  really  felt  myself  quite  at  home,  for  we  had  lived  in 
a  tarantass  night  and  day  for  nearly  two  months,  and  I  slept 
as  soundly  in  it  now  over  the  roughest  of  roads  as  in  the 
most    comfortable    bed    in    a   good    inn.       The    tarantass, 
too,  it   must    be  remembered,   is   not  provided  with  steel 
springs,  or  any  springs    at  all;  and  were  it  so  provided, 
the  springs  would  not  last  long  over  such  roads,  and  with 
such  helter-skelter  driving,  as  is  common  in  Siberia.     It  is 
merely  the  body  of  a  carriage  placed  upon  four  ash  poles,  the 
ends  resting  upon  the  axles,  connecting  together  the  fore  and 
hind  wheels  at  a  distance  apart  of  about  nine  feet.     This 
great  distance  between  the  axles  of  the  carriage  no  doubt  is 
the  cause  of  a  certain  amount  of  spring  in  the  ash  poles^  and 
this,  with  the  help  of  pillows  the  Russians  always  travel  with, 
and  with  which  we  travelled  also,  enables  one  to  withstand 
the  roughest  of  jolting  without  experiencing  much  inconveni- 
ence from  it     Well,  we  started  at  10  p.m.,  and  for  awhile 
travelled  over  level  ground,  but  soon  reached  an  undulating 
country,  and  then  began  to  mount,  until  we  reached,  about 
1  A.M.,  the  greatest  elevation  of  the  road  over  the  Ural  Moan- 
tains,  sixteen  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and 
seven  h^ndred  and  fifty  feet  above  Yekaterinburg.     Here, 
within  a   stone's   throw  of  the    road,   between  the  postal 
stations  of  Taletzar  and  Behmbrm*kia,  and  between  two  pretty 
tall  firs,  the  Russian  Government  has  erected  a  pillar  of  be- 
tween fifteen  and  twenty  feet  high,  to  mark  the  division  be- 
tween Asia  and  Europe.    We  stopped  the  carriage,  and  walked 
up  close  to  the  pillar,  which  is  upon  a  brick  platform,  en- 
closed by  a  wooden  railing  ;  and  as  well  as  I  could  see  at  that 
early  hour  of  a  moonless  morning,  I  should  say  the  pillar 
itself  was  of  grey  marble.     In  placing  the  pillar,  the  Rus- 
sians have  no  doubt  arbitrarily  chosen  this  spot,  being  the 


URAL  MOUNTAINS  159 

highest  point  of  the  road ;  for  some  forty  years  ago,  Mr 
Erman,  who  travelled  through  Siberia,  and  who  gives  a 
minute  description  of  everything  he  saw,  states  that  the 
division  then  between  Europe  and  Asia  existed  some  48  versts 
farther  westward,  between  the  two  postal  stations  of  Kirgir- 
hansk  and  Grobopek.  But  the  Russians  are  now  the  lords 
of  all  this  country,  and  they  can  change  with  the  same 
facility  the  boundary  line  between  Europe  and  Asia  with 
which  the  Emperor,  as  head  of  the  Church,  by  an  ^^  ordre  de 
jour  "  in  1853  created  a  purgatory,  a  half-way  house  unknown 
before  to  the  Russian  Greek  Church,  in  order  that  the  prayers 
for  the  dead  which  had  always  been  read  in  the  church, 
might  no  longer  be  an  illogical  ceremony.  The  wide  plain 
which  extends  around  Yekaterinburg  stands  about  850 
feet  above  sea-level.  We  travelled  on  over  a  very  rough 
road  during  the  whole  of  the  Qth,  and  at  rather  a  slow  pace. 
The  weather  was  intolerably  hot,  and  the  carriage  the  whole 
time  enveloped  in  a  cloud  of  fine  dust  We  were  constantly 
meeting  long  lines  of  the  one-horse  four-wheeled  carts  uni- 
versal in  Russia;  some  conveying  exiles — men,  women,  and 
chfldren — ^towards  Siberia;  others  laden  with  the  products 
of  Europe  going  in  the  same  direction ;  and  again,  many 
laden  with  teas  principally,  but  no  doubt  carrying  other 
articles  as  well,  the  products  of  the  East,  making  their  way 
towards  St  Petersburg.  There  seemed  to  be  but  one  man  to 
every  four  or  five  carts.  Harvesting  in  the  Ural  Mountains 
had  jufit  commenced,  but  as  we  travelled  westward  we  found 
it  much  more  advanced.  I  saw  no  wheat,  and  very 
little  oats  or  barley,  in  this  part  of  our  route.  Rye  every- 
where, and  fair  crops;  the  straw  much  longer  than  what 
wc  saw  before  arriving  at  Yekaterinburg.  The  hay  harvest 
is  just  finished  and  put  into  small  untidy  ricks.  It  re- 
mains out  during  winter,  and  is  cut  and  carted  during  that 
season  to  where  it  may  be  wanted.  Many  of  the  carts  travel- 
ling towards  St  Petersburg  with  loosely-packed  bales  of 
cotton  come  from  the  south,  Tashkend,  and  from  that 
direction  ;  others  have  hides  and  wool.  The  country  passed 
through  was  alternately  wooded  and  cultivated,  and  the 
villages  large  and  numerous.  On  the  evening  of  the  10th  we 
passed  through  the  village  of  Slatourst,  situated  in  a  depres- 


1 60  ARRIVE  A  T  PERM. 

sion  some  650  feet  above  sea-level,  upon  the  river  Irgina 
In  this  district,  from  a  clilF  some  fifty  feet  high,  gush  copioni 
rillsy  which,  uniting  at  some  little  distance  from  their  sonioe 
form  no  inconsiderable  stream,  which  flows  into  the  Ir^na 
and  thence  onwards  to  the  Snilva.  Erman  says,  ^^  Nothing 
in  truth,  but  a  very  peculiar  structure  of  the  rock  beneati 
the  surface,  can  explain  so  abundant  a  discharge  of  water, 
in  a  place,  too,  where  so  little  falls  from  the  atmosphere; 
and  the  justness  of  this  remark  is  confirmed  by  a  variety  ol 
local  circumstances.  The  inhabitants  say  that  the  ground 
on  which  they  have  ventured  to  set  their  habitations  is  ubder' 
mined  with  caverns.  Slips  and  sinking  of  the  earth  are  hen 
usual  occurrences ;  and  in  such  cases  rills  disappear  and 
others  spring  up  to  take  their  places.  Indeed,  tiie  ground 
here  is  so  uncertain  a  possession,  owing  to  its  subterranean 
constitution,  that  the  peasants  no  longer  take  the  trouble  to 
cultivate  the  treacherous  fields  around  them,  but  ply  theii 
agricultural  labours  at  a  distance  from  the  village,  where  the 
soil  is  less  fruitful,  but  possesses  more  stability/'  Kungue, 
the  next  place  we  reached,  is  a  straggling  town,  containing 
some  well-built  brick  houses.  The  Suilva  flows  close  by  the 
town.  We  had  hitherto  travelled  very  slowly,  and  unless 
we  increased  our  speed,  it  was  very  evident  we  could  not 
reach  Perm  before  midnight,  or  perhaps  later;  so  we  took 
the  precaution,  whilst  there  was  yet  time  to  make  up  the 
leeway,  to  bribe  our  yemshicks  heavily,  and  in  place  of  giving 
them  for  each  stage  ten  copecks  (3d.),  we  offered  them 
fifteen  copecks ;  this  had  the  desired  efiect,  and  through 
intense  heat  and  a  cloud  of  dust  we  bowled  along  for  the 
remainder  of  the  journey  at  the  rate  of  twelve  versts  an  hour, 
and  succeeded  in  arriving  at  Perm  at  9.30  p.m.,  a  little  after 
dark.  We  put  up  at  the  Caucasse  et  Mercure  Hotel,  a 
great  improvement  upon  everything  I  had  met  with  since 
leaving  Shanghae,  and  where  was  found  a  proprietor  who 
could  speak  a  little  French.  From  him  we  learnt  that  a 
steamer  would  start  at  ten  next  morning  for  Nigne-Novgorod* 
A  little  reflection  determined  us  to  start  by  her,  and  to  ^v^^  up 
our  first  intention  of  remaining  a  day  at  Perm.  After  sitting 
down  to  a  well-appointed  table,  and  having  partaken  of  a 
regular  dinner — the  first  we  had  seen  for  a  long  time — we  lay 


PERM  TO  NIGNE-NOVGOROD.  i6i 

down  to  rest,  and  at  six  in  the  morning  I  was  again  on  foot, 
bnsfly  employed  in  washing  and  bmshing,  in  order  to  put  on 
a  tolerable  appearance,  now  that  we  were  about  to  enter  again, 
after  three  months'  constant  travelling,  into  civilised  society. 
At  ten  o'clock  this  morning  we  found  ourselves  in  a  com- 
fortable cabin  on  board  the  Permean^  for  which  we  had  paid 
fifty-four  rubles  eighty  copecks  for  our  passage  to  Nigne- 
NoTgorod,  with  a  larder  at  hand  from  which  we  could  supply 
ourselves  with  all  necessaries  and  some  of  the  luxuries  of 
life.  This  state  of  things  was  a  great  change  for  us,  and  we 
did  not  fail  to  appreciate  it  at  its  full  value.  We  are  to  arrive 
at  Nigne-Novgorod,  they  say,  on  the  16th,  the  distance  being 
1320  versts.  The  temperature  in  our  cabin  now  at  noon 
narks  Sd"",  and  yet  it  seems  a  pleasant  temperature.  The 
great  heat  of  the  last  two  days  whilst  travelling  makes  me 
think  so. 

\Wi. — The  aneroid  at  Perm  showed  the  Kama  to  be  400 

feet  above  my  index-mark.     The  aneroid  now  at  noon  shows 

the  Kama  to  be  250  feet  above  my  index-mark,  and  the 

temperature  has  ranged  for  the  last  twenty-four  hours  from 

7ff*  to  86^     We  are  moving  through  the  water  at  the  rate 

often  knots  an  hour,  which,  added  to  the  current  (two  and  a 

half  knots),  makes  our  speed  over  the  ground  twelve  and  a 

half  knots.     The  Permean  is  an  iron  steamer,  built  in  this 

i^hbourhood  some  seventeen  years  ago;  she  is  190  feet 

long,  quite  a  shell  of  a  thing,  drawing  two  feet  water  for- 

'^  and  three  feet  aft,  with  sixty  horse-power  engines; 

like  the  steamers  on  the  Tom,  she  droops  towards  the  bows 

one  and  a  half  feet,  and  towards  the  stern  three  feet.     They 

tell  me  this  mode  of  building  imparts  strength.     She  can 

carry  fuel  (wood)  for  half  a  day's  steaming  only.     The  Per^ 

9ean  is  one  of  twenty-one  steamers  running  between  Perm 

and  Nigne-Novgorod,  owned  by  the  Caucasse  et  Mercure 

Company,  who  have  besides  fifteen  much  larger  boats  running 

on  the  Volga  between  Nigne-Novgorod   and  the   Caspian 

Sea.     The  foel  for  this  boat  costs  seventy  rubles  a  day,  and 

the  whole  expense  for  a  day  amounts  to  120  rubles.     We. 

have  four  cabin  passengers  besides  ourselves,  and  perhaps  a 

hundred  of  second  and  third  class.     The  average  breadth  of 

the  Kama  bo  far  is  about  half  a  mile,  and  in  many  places 


i62  PECULIARITIES  OF  RUSSIANS. 

we  haye  found  very  little  water  oyer  and  aboye  what  itb 
require  to  float  in.     It  is  now  almost  at  its  lowest  point    In 
the  spring  it  has  twenty-four  feet  more  water  in  it    We 
stop  about  four  times  a  day  on  an  ayerage  throughout  the 
trip  to  take  in  wood  and  pick  up  passengers.     We  have 
passed  many  yillages  on  both  sides  of  the  riyer^  and  a  fair 
amount  of  cleared  land,  though  generally  the  pine-tree  GOten 
the  ground  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach.     We  haye  passed 
two  steamers  bound  to  Pemu    At  last  we  are  out  of  the 
region  of  birch,  and  see  little  else  now  but  pine.    The  captain 
tells  me  the  channel  of  the  riyer  is  constantly  shifting.    The 
Kama  is  nayigable  for  steamers  somewhat  smaller  than  the 
Permean  for  800  yersts  aboye  Perm.     These  Russians  have 
their  peculiarities :  they  seem  neyer  to  thin  their  hair ;  it  ii 
cut  or  clipped  round,  and  looks  as  if  the  operator  had  placed 
a  bowl  on  the  yictim's  head  to  guide  him  in  his  work.    If  a 
man's  waistcoat  is  buttoned  oyer  his  shirt,  the  tail  of  his 
shirt  is  always  left  sticking  outside  his  trousers,  and  perhaps 
oyer  all.    Though  the  thermometer  may  be  at  90'',  he  wean  a 
greatcoat     Boots  he  almost  always  wears :  out  of  a  hundred 
or  more  passengers  now  on  board,  there  is  only  one  of  either 
sex  whose  legs  are  not  encased  in  a  pair  of  jack-boots,  and 
that  fellow  can  afford  nothing  better  than  a  pair  of  bark 
shoes.     I  witnessed  this  morning  a  large  amount  of  hai^ 
combing  going  on  on  deck,  and  kept  at  a  respectable  distance 
from  the  operators.     Their  deyotions,  too,  were  performed 
with  much  grayity,  for  they  are  an  orderly  sort  of  people, 
unless  when  they  drink  too  much  brandy,  which  is  yery  often 
the  case. 

\Zth. — The  temperature  the  last  twenty-four  hours  hai 
ranged  between  TG""  and  83"" ;  and  the  aneroid  now  at  noon 
marks  a  hundred  feet  aboye  my  index^  showing  that  the  riTer 
has  a  fall  in  the  distance  run  since  yesterday — about  300 
miles— of  150  feet  We  haye  bumped  two  or  three  timei 
to-day,  but  neyer  stuck  fast ;  and  as  the  bottom  is  sand,  the 
steamer  does  not  suffer.  This  steamer  cost  originally  40,000 
rubles;  and  the  captain  tells  me  that  last  year  she  made 
a  clear  gain  of  the  whole  of  that  sum,  and  this  year,  so  far, 
she  has  netted  25,000  rubles.  The  company  is  now  build- 
ing— in  France,  I  think — a  steamer  of  three  stories^  such  as 


STOPPING-PLACES  FOR  WOOD.  163 

tre  common  on  the  rivers  in  the  United  States ;  she  will  be 
260  feet  long,  and  will  draw  only  three  feet  water.  The 
trade  on  the  Volga  and  this  river  also  is  yearly  increasing, 
for  in  this  year  only  forty  new  steamers  have  been  launched  I 
The  navigation  on  both  rivers  is  closed  by  the  ice  some  time 
in  October,  and  opens  in  the  spring,  early  in  May,  so  that 
for  six  months  the  boats  are  laid  up,  and  the  officers  are  free 
to  go  where  they  like. 

At  most  of  the  places  where  we  stop  to  take  in  wood,  the 
people  come  down  from  the  neighbouring  villages,  bringing 
with  them  whatever  they  think  they  can  sell  to  passengers. 
Usually  the  steamer  runs  alongside  a  hulk  which  is  connected 
with  the  shore  by  a  bridge,  and  on  each  side  of  the  approach 
to  this  bridge  the  country-people  range  themselves,  display- 
ing whatever  they  may  have  brought  for  sale.  The  pas 
seems  to  be  ceded  by  general  consent  to  the  beggars,  for  they 
ire  the  first  gentlemen  you  meet  with  on  putting  your  foot 
on  shore;  invariably  half-a-dozen  are  there  waiting  to 
Balnte  you.  They  are  the  most  polite  fellows  in  the  world  ; 
their  bowing  and  scraping  fairly  puts  you  to  the  blush ;  it  is 
almost  adoration ;  and  if  you  have  a  spark  of  compassionate 
feeling  in  your  composition,  they  are  sure  to  wheedle  you 
out  of  a  few  copecks.  Having  run  the  gauntlet  of  the 
b^gars,  you  find  yourself  between  a  double  line  of  fire  from 
people  quite  as  eager  to  get  your  money  as  the  beggars  you 
have  just  passed  through.  Tempting  fried  fish — these  rivers 
abound  in  fish.  There  are  very  fair-sized  potatoes,  boiled  in 
their  jackets  j'ust  as  an  Irishman  would  himself  desire,  bursting 
jnst  sufficiently  to  show  their  mealy  character.  Bread  equalling 
in  whiteness  any  Parisian  roll ;  besides  which,  of  course,  there 
is  any  amount  of  black  rye-bread,  the  staple  diet  of  the 
peasant  Russian  dishes  ready  cooked,  the  names  being  un- 
known to  me ;  and  even  on  one  occasion  two  roasted  pigs 
were  there  to  tempt  the  hungry  passenger.  There  was 
always  a  poor  show  of  fruit;  cherries  small  and  taste- 
leasy  very  small  green  gooseberries,  and  some  sour  red 
currants.  The  wild  raspberries  were  better,  they  were 
always  abundant  and  eatable.  I  could  buy  for  a  penny  as 
many  aa  I  could  eat  Water-melons  were  there  also  by  the 
boat-load ;  a  good  large  one  costs  forty  copecks ;  only  worth 


i64  THE  VOLGA— THE  KAMA. 

five  copecks  at  the  place  of  its  growth,  but  three  rabies  in 
St  Petersburg.  Then  there  were  sellers  of  honey-water  and 
kwds  by  the  bucketful — a  very  common  drink  in  Russia ;  and 
honey  in  the  combs  in  fair  quantity;  To  all  this  may  be 
added  eggs,  two  for  a  farthing,  butter  and  milk.  Then,  again, 
certain  places  at  which  we  stopped  could  boast  of  their 
specialties.  For  example,  at  one  place,  boots  of  all  sizes  and 
descriptions  were  ranged  along  the  beach  in  great  quantity, 
and  there  were  few  of  the  passengers  who  did  not  invest  in 
them.  Strange,  I  have  never  seen  a  Russian  wear  shoes, 
unless  the  very  poorest  class,  who  wear  bast  shoes  ;  leather 
shoes  never.  I  have  forgotten  to  enumerate  among  the  fhdts 
bramble-berries  and  black  currants,  and  among  the  vegetables 
cucumbers,  a  staple  article  of  food  with  the  Russians ;  thej 
eat  them  by  the  dozen  raw,  and  without  any  condiment 
whatever — I  had  almost  said  by  the  bushel.  Hazel-nuts  too 
were  abundant.  The  wood  at  these  stopping-places  was  in- 
variably brought  on  board  on  handbarrows  by  women^  mostly 
dressed  in  Manchester  prints.  They  were  always  clean  and 
tidy,  stout  robust  wenches,  and  very  often  with  a  Celtic  cast 
of  countenance.  I  am  told  they  are  paid  sixpence  each  for 
about  an  hour's  work. 

14M. — The  temperature  has  ranged  to-day  between  76'  and 
88^  The  aneroid,  after  having  gone  somewhat  below  100 
above  the  index-mark  at  the  confluence  of  the  E^ama  and 
the  Volga,  stands  now  again  at  100.  Weather  very  fine. 
We  came  into  the  Volga  at  6.80  last  evening,  and  since  theii 
we  have  seen  a  score  or  two  of  steamers,  mostly  tug-boats 
with  barges  in  tow,  going  down  stream.  I  don't  think  we 
have  more  than  a  three-knot  current  against  us  here  in  the 
Volga,  but  when  the  river  is  full  of  water  the  current  runs 
considerably  stronger.  All  along  the  Kama  we  had  more  or 
less  of  high  land  on  the  right  bank,  and  low  on  the  left 
Now  in  the  Volga  it  is  the  reverse  :  the  land  is  highest  on 
our  left  hand,  though  it  is  in  reality  the  right  bank  of  the 
river,  as  we  are  now  ascending  the  stream.  This  morning  we 
stopped  at  a  town,  and  remained  there  an  hour  repairing 
something  that  was  broken  about  the  starboard  paddle.  I 
went  on  shore  with  a  Russian  engineer  to  visit  an  old  chnrchi 
but  found  it  so  thronged  that  we  could  not  get  near  the  door. 


NIGNE'NOVGOROD.  165 

It  seemB  the  Ist  Angast  (Rufisiaii  style)  is  a  great  holiday  in 
the  Churchi  the  anniyersary  of  the  birth  or  death  (my  com- 
{Mtnion  told  me)  of  the  godmother  of  Christ.  We  met  with 
a  nmnerons  procession,  in  which  many  women  figured,  carry- 
ing paintings.  My  Bossian  friend  told  me  they  were  all 
widows,  none  others  being  eligible  for  such  work.  At  mid- 
night we  stopped  for  three  hours  at  Kasan. 

16^,  Moscow. — ^At  ten  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the 
14th  we  arrived  at  Nigne-Novgorod,  after  a  passage  of  four 
days  from  Perm;  distance,  1320  vers ts.  Weather  fine,  tem- 
peratore  ranging  from  16"*  to  86^  My  aneroid  makes  this 
hotel  (M.  Billet,  La  Yille  de  Hamburg)  just  500  feet 
above  the  sea.  Nigne-Novgorod  we  found  a  busy  place. 
I  oonnted  1 00  steamers  in  the  port.  The  streets,  on  landing, 
were  crowded  ¥rith  all  sorts  of  vehicles  moving  towards  the 
&ir,  which  we  reached  by  crossing  the  river  Oka  by  a 
bridge  of  boats.  The  railway  station  might  be  said  to  be 
within  the  limits  of  the  fair,  or  at  any  rate  joining  on  to  its 
western  extremity.  To  that  point  we  directed  our  steps  on 
landing;  and  after  depositing  our  goods  and  chattels,  we 
hired  a  vehicle  and  drove  through  the  hundred  and  one 
streets,  now  thronged  with  goods  and  people  from  all  parts  of 
the  world,  but  which  will  be  entirely  empty  when  the  fair 
has  mn  its  course.  They  say  that  Nigne-Novgorod,  when 
left  to  itself,  is  a  town  of  40,000  inhabitants,  but  that  dur- 
ing the  fair  it  contains  150,000.  In  1827  the  number  of 
people  who  visited  the  fair  was  estimated  at  600,000.  From 
tlie  fair  we  drove  to  the  upper  town,  overlooking  the  lower 
or  business  part  of  Nigne.  It  consists  of  good  houses, 
generally  with  roughly-paved  streets,  but  with  convenient  side- 
walks. A  two  hours'  drive  satisfied  us  that  there  was  nothing 
in  Nigne  worth  remaining  longer  for;  so  with  a  Russian 
gentleman  with  whom  we  fraternised  on  board  the  steamer 
we  took  our  dinner  at  the  railway  station,  and  started  by 
train  at  5  p.ic^  and  arrived  in  Moscow  at  8  A.M. ;  fifteen 
honrs  on  the  road,  a  distance  of  400  versts.  The  carriages 
are  comfortable,  both  first  and  second  class — the  fare,  first 
class,  being  12  rubles  30  copecks ;  and  I  paid  for  my  lug- 
gage all  over  a  pood  (thirty-six  lbs.),  65  copecks  a  pood. 
The  country  is  quite  flat  between  Nigne  and  Moscow,  and  a 


i66  MOSCOW. 

large  portion  of  it  under  cultivation.  Much  of  the  road  runs 
through  birch  and  pine  forests.  Many  poor-looking  yiUages 
are  passed  on  the  way,  but  only  one  town — ^Vladimir — ib  oI 
any  importance.  The  land  is  very  light,  sandy  indeed,  and 
tbe  only  grain  crops  grown  are  rye  and  oats,  now  being  bar 
vested.  Indeed,  the  harvest  by  this  time  everywhere  in  Sibe- 
ria and  Southern  Russia  is  finished,  and  the  grain  must  have 
been  got  in  in  first-rate  condition,  for  during  the  past  twc 
months  we  have  only  had  two  or  three  wet  days.  Every- 
where in  Siberia,  if  you  ask  for  water  to  wash,  a  servani 
attends  to  pour  it  over  your  hands  as  you  require  it;  or, 
as  in  many  of  the  postal  houses,  an  earthen  vessel,  or  some- 
times a  tea-kettle,  or  a  bronze  vessel  made  for  the  purpose, 
suspended  over  a  large  copper  pan,  is  always  kept  charged 
with  water  for  the  convenience  of  passengers  who  desire  to 
wash  their  hands.  This  custom,  it  would  seem,  is  as  old  aa 
the  hills,  and  we  find  it  described  by  Homer  I — at  least,  sc 
says  M.  Erman. 

Tbe  Kremlin  is  among  the  most  remarkable  features  d 
Moscow.  The  crenellated  walls  that  encircle  it  are  approached 
through  well-built .  streets.  Watch-towers  stand  at  everj 
angle.  There  are  many  entrances  to  the  Kremlin ;  but  one 
of  them,  through  a  dark- vaulted  covered  way,  named  the 
^^  Saviour's  Gate,''  contains  a  miraculous  image,  which  the 
mass  of  the  people  regard  with  the  profoundest  reverence, 
and  no  one  is  allowed  to  pass  covered.  On  the  south  and 
south-east,  the  hill  on  which  the  Kremlin  stands  extends  tc 
the  cliff,  at  the  foot  of  which  the  Moskva  and  the  Neglina 
unite  their  waters.  The  extensive  area  within  the  walls  if 
confusedly  strewed  over  with  churches  and  monasteries, 
military  works  and  the  ancient  palace.  Placed  around  three 
sides  of  one  of  the  squares,  some  on  carriages,  but  the 
greater  part  not  mounted,  are  at  least  a  thousand  pieces  oJ 
bronze  ordnance,  of  all  sizes  and  patterns.  One  handsome 
old  cannon  stands  mounted  at  a  corner.  It  must  be  about 
twelve  feet  long,  of  the  same  size  from  the  butt  to  the 
muzzle,  and  calculated  to  receive  a  shell,  a  heap  of  which 
stand  alongside  it,  of  good  thirty  inches  in  diameter.  It  u 
indeed  a  monster.  But  the  great  bell,  resting  upon  the 
ground  at  the  foot  of  Ivan  Tower,  is  a  still  more  wonderful 


MOSCO  W—ST  PETERSBURG.  167 

piece  of  casting.  It  is  oyer  twenty-one  feet  high,  and 
twenty-two  feet  at  its  greatest  diameter.  A  large  piece  is 
broken  out  of  it^  and  shows  its  thickness  to  be  nowhere  less 
than  six  inches,  and  nearly  two  feet  at  the  lip  or  lower 
edge.  It  is  said  to  weigh  between  300,000  and  400,000 
pounds,  and  is  no  doubt  the  largest  bell  in  the  world.  It 
was  probably  cast  in  the  reign  of  the  Empress  Anna,  about 
1730.  Calculated  at  the  present  price  of  copper,  the  mass  of 
metal  in  the  "  eternal  bell "  might  be  worth  two  millions  of 
.  rubles,  without  regard  to  noble  metals  it  may  contain.  A 
large  bell  in  China,  cast  in  1403,  weighs  only  120,000 
pounds. 

The  crown  jewels — ^robes  and  crowns  covered  with  precious 
stones  and  pearls — in  an  apartment  attached  to  the  royal 
chapel,  may  be  seen  for  a  few  copecks,  I  yesterday  drove 
out  to  an  eminence  on  th^  high  bank,  at  the  foot  of  which 
run  the  Moskva  and  the  Neglina,  to  enjoy  fine  views  of  the 
city  and  the  extensive  plain  upon  which  it  stands.  I  was 
repaid  for  the  two  rubles  the  drive  cost  me,  particularly  as  I 
got*  into  the  midst  of  harvest  operations,  and  reaping  and 
threshiog  of  oats  and  rye  going  on,  at  Sparrow's  Hill,  the 
name  of  the  eminence  from  which  the  view  is  obtained.  The 
temperature  ranges  here  at  present  between  72°  and  SS"*,  and 
iny  aneroid  says  the  hotel  stands  about  500  feet  above 
the  sea. 

yitk  and  19M,  St  Petersburg.— On  17th  I  paid  my  bill 
at  IL  Billet's  hotel  at  Moscow,  and  left  by  the  2  p.m.  train 
ftr  6t  Petersburg,  where  I   arrived  at  eight  o'clock  next 
morning;  eighteen  and  a  half  hours.     The  fare  is  nineteen 
nibles,  with  two  rubles  for  a  bed,  if  you  choose  to  have  one. 
In  addition,  I  paid  twelve  rubles  for  the  carriage  of  'my  lug- 
gage, at  the  rate  of  one  ruble  twenty  copecks  the  pood  of 
thirty-six  English  pounds.     I  am  now  comfortably  lodged 
at  the  Hotel  d'Angleterre,  but  hope  to  leave  it  to-morrow, 
of  which  there  seems  to  be  some  doubt  as  to  procuring  a 
vis6  for  my  passport  in  time.    A  heavy  thunder-storm  here 
to-dajy  and  torrents  of  rain,  the  first  I  have  experienced  for 
a  long  time.    Temperature  ranging  between  70°  and  80^ 


SECOND   TOUR. 

THE  UNITED  STATES— SAN  FRANCISCO— SANDWICH 
ISLANDS— NEW  ZEALAND— AUSTRALIA— TASMANIA. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Omied  States— Kentucky  cayes— Saltpetre  eolleoted— Fiah  and  animals— Prootor*s 
CtT»— Chicago — Salt  Lake  Cl^ — Bailway— Mormons — ^Argument  for  plurality 
of  wives— History  of  Mormonism — Brigham  Young— Hamilton — Silver  mines, 
their  wealth — Sacramento — San  Francisco — Tosemite  valley- Big  trees—Sculp- 
tured granite — Calayeras — ^Big  trees— Grisly  bear  attacks  sheep — ^Mrs  Parker — 
Sequoia  and  other  trees — Ago  of  trees — Forest  fires — Geysers— Fruitful  Napa 
'ndley— Quiokiilyer  mines— Irrigation  by  artesian  wells— The  mint. 

I  UNDID  at  Halifax  Jane  Ist,  1870,  and  after  a  month's 
traTelling  in  British  North  America  and  the  States,  I  found 
myself  on  Ist  July  at  "  Cave  City,"  about  to  visit  the  won- 
derM  mammoth  caves  of  Kentucky. 

The  road  from  Cave  City  to  the  cave  is  some  ten  miles 
long,  and  very  rough.  We  got  to  the  end  of  it  at  9  A.M., 
having  left  the  city  (a  settlement  containing  a  dozen  houses) 
at  6.30  A.M.  On  our  way  we  were  invited  to  inspect  ^^  Indian 
Ca?e,"  about  a  mile  in  length,  but  we  declined.  We  had 
with  us  in  the  carriage  a  Southern  planter,  who  was  taking 
two  school-girls,  his  sisters,  to  see  the  caves.  On  arrival  at 
the  Cave  Hotel,  we  found  a  party  only  waiting  for  any  pas-* 
Bengers  the  coach  might  bring  to  start  upon  their  peregrina- 
tions to  the  cave.  The  ladies  were  all  dressed  Bloomer  fashion, 
in  very  bright  colours ;  and  our  two  fellow-passengers  soon 
rigged  themselves  out  in  similar  attire.  These  dresses  are 
kept  in  the  hotel  for  the  convenience  of  visitors.  The  party 
we  joined  numbered  thirty-three  ladies  and  gentlemen — 
the  staff  of  two  large  schools  at  Cincinnati — so  our  party 
made  up  the  number  to  thirty-eight  We  entered  the  cave 
at  9.30  A.M.|  and  it  was  7.30  p.m.  when  we  returned.  Where 
we  entered^  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  hotel,  is  not 
the  original  mouth ;  this  latter  was  blocked  up  centuries  ago ; 
or  rather  where  the  present  mouth  is  caved  in,  and  thus  cut 
off  about  a  mile  of  the  original  cave.  This  mile  of  cave  is 
now  called  Dickson's  Cave^  and  a  voice  in  it  is .  distinctly 


172  MAMMOTH  CA  VES. 

heard  at  the  present  entrance  of  the  great  cave.    This  entrance 
is  an  opening  wide  at  the  top,  getting  narrower  as  yon 
descend,  and  at  a  depth  of  fifty  feet  you  torn  into  the  nurath 
of  the  cave  proper,  and  pass  through  on  a  level  what  is  called 
The  Narrows,  a  passage  of  some  seven  feet  average  height 
and  fifty  average  width,  until  you  come  to  the  vats,  built  and 
used  in  1812  for  the  manufacture  of  saltpetre.    This  was  an 
operation  of  considerable  cost^  and  shows  the  Americans  most 
have  had  difficulty  in  supplying  themselves  with  powder  by 
ordinary  means  for  carrying  on  the  war  in  which  they  were 
then  engaged  with  us.    The  wood  used  in  building  the  vats 
is  still  sound,  and  on  the  floor  of  the  cave  the  marks  of 
wheels  and  of  bullocks'  feet  are  still  distinct,  both  having 
been  made  in  softish  mud,  which,  after  saltpetre-making  was 
given  up,  hardened,  and  is  now  almost  rock.    Where  the  vata 
are  is  called  the  Rotunda,  a  room  100  feet  high  and  175  feet 
greatest  diameter.     Farther  on  we  came  to  several  small 
cottages  built  for  the  accommodation  of  persons  afflicted  with 
consumption.      Next  we  came  to  the  Methodist   Church, 
eighty  feet  in  diameter  and  forty  feet  in  height.     Next  in 
order  is  Wandering  Willie's  Spring,  a   beautifully  fluted 
niche  on  the  left-hand  wall.     Then  come  (Gothic  galleriea, 
which  lead  to  the  Gothic  Avenue  and  the  Grand  Arch,  lead- 
ing to  the  Giant's  Coffin,  fifty  feet  high  and  sixty  feet  wide, 
the  Giant's  Coffin  being  twenty  feet  wide  and  eight  feet 
deep.     The  Ant-eater,  an  efflorescence  of  black  gypsum  on  a 
white  ground.     Farther  on  a  group  of  figures  is  seen  on  the 
ceiling  called  the  Giant,  his  Wife,  and  Child ;  still  farther 
on  the  figure  of  a  colossal  mammoth  may  be  seen  on  the  ceil- 
ing.   We  next  come  to  the  Deserted  Chamber,  100  feet  in 
length,  with  a  low  ceiling,  and  following  on,  the  Wooden  Bowl 
Cave.     Then  we  reach,  having  descended  a  flight  of  fitepSi 
Martha's  Palace,  forty  feet  in  height  and  sixty  in  diameter; 
and  Side-saddle  Pit,  over  which  rests  a  dome  sixty  feet  in 
height.     The  pit  is  ninety  feet  deep.    Close  to  is  Minerva's 
Dome,  fifty  feet  high  and  ten  feet  wide.    The  Bottomless  Fit 
comes  next ;  it  is  1 75  feet  deep.     Shelby's  Dome,  sixty  feet 
high,  is  directly  over  the  Bottomless  Pit   Then  follows  Bevel* 
ler's  Hall ;  and  after  passing  several  other  places,  all  named, 
we  come  to  the  Fat  Man's  Misery,  a  narrow,  tortuous  avenue 


MAMMOTH  CA  VES.  1 73 

Bfty  jards  in  length,  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock  by  the 
mechanical  action  of  water.  The  lower  part  of  the  ayenue 
raries  in  width  from  eighteen  inches  to  three  feet,  and  the 
upper  part — ^that  is,  from  the  height  of  a  man's  chest  to  his 
head — ^from  four  to  ten  feet  A  hall,  appropriately  named 
Ghreat  Belief,  immediately  follows  Fat  Man's  Misery ;  it 
faries  in  width  from  forty  to  sixty  feet,  and  in  height  from 
fite  to  twenty-fiye  feet  From  the  ceiling  immense  nodules 
cyf  ferruginous  limestone  project 

We  now  pass  the  Biver  Hall,  which  extends  from  Great 
Belief  to  Biver  Styx,  varying  in  width  from  forty  to  sixty 
feet  The  Bacon  Chamber  on  the  right  is  decidedly  curious ; 
here  is  seen  a  fine  collection  of  limestone  hams  and  shoulders 
nupended  from  the  ceiling  as  in  a  smoke-house.  Forty 
feet  below  the  terrace  leading  to  the  natural  bridge  is  a  body 
of  water  fifteen  feet  deep,  twenty  feet  wide,  and  fifty  feet  long, 
called  the  Dead  Sea.  The  Biver  Styx  is  150  feet  long,  fifteen 
to  forty  feet  wide,  and  thirty  to  forty  feet  deep,  it  has  a  sub- 
terranean communication  with  other  rivers  of  the  cave.  The 
natural  bridge  spans  the  Biver  Styx,  and  is  about  thirty  feet 
above  it  We  now  come  to  Lake  Lethe,  150  yards  long,  and 
from  ten  to  forty  yards  wide,  depth  from  three  to  thirty  feet ; 
the  ceiling  over  this  lake  is  ninety  feet  high.  We  crossed  the 
lake  in  boats ;  disembarking,  we  enter  the  Long  Walk,  which 
extends  to  the  Echo  Biver,  a  distance  of  500  yards ;  the  ceil- 
ing is  forty  feet  high,  and  the  rocks  which  compose  it  pre- 
lent  a  striking  resemblance  to  cumulus  clouds;  they  are 
eomposed  of  white  limestone.  The  floor  \a  covered  with 
white  sand ;  it  requires  a  rise  of  only  five  feet  water  in  Echo 
Biver  to  overflow  Great  Walk ;  there  are  times  when  Great 
Walk  is  filled  with  water  from  the  floor  to  the  ceiling,  and 
it  is  not  an  uncommon  occurrence  for  the  water  to  rise  to  the 
height  of  sixty  feet  in  Lake  Lethe.  This  great  rise  of  water 
IB  produced  by  freshets  in  Green  Biver.  Echo  Biver  extends 
from  Great  Walk  to  the  commencement  of  Silliman's  Avenue, 
a  distance  of  three-quarters  of  a  mile.  The  arch  of  Silli- 
man^s  Avenue,  through  which  we  enter  on  embarking  on 
Echo  Biver,  is  seven  feet  high  when  we  passed  through  in  a 
large  flat-bottomed  boat,  and,  as  we  proceeded  on  our  way,  we 
had  an  average  height  from  the  water  to  the  ceiling  of  fifteen 


174  MAMMOTH  CAVES. 

feet.    At  some  points  the  river  is  200  feet  wide,  the  depth 
varying  from  ten  to  thirty  feet    The  ceiling  is  arched,  smooth, 
and  solid  rock,  more  resembling  a  work  of  art  than  of  nature. 
Upon  landing,  we  enter  Silliman's  Avenne^  one  and  a  half 
miles  long,  extending  from  the  river  to  the  pass  of  £1  Gfaor. 
Its  height  varies  from  twenty  to  forty  feet,  and  it  is  from 
twenty  to  200  feet  in  width.     The  walla  and  ceiling  ire 
ragged  and  water-worn.    The  objects  of  interest  in  SilliiDaii  b 
Avenne  are — Cascade  Hall,  200  feet  in  diameter,  and  tweatf 
feet  high.     The  Dripping  Spring,  a  pool  of  water  supplied 
from  the  ceiling.    Stalactites  and  stalagmites  are  found  at  this 
point.    The  Infernal  Begion ;  the  floor  is  composed  of  wet  day, 
and  very  irregular.    The  Sea  Serpent,  a  tortuous  crevice  in 
the  rock  overhead.    The  Hill  of  Fatigue,  hard  to  climb.    The 
Great  Western,  an  immense  rock  resembling  the  stem  of  the 
Great  Western.     The  Rabbit,  a  large  stone  resembling  that 
animal.     Ole  BulPs   Concert-room,  thirty  feet  wide,  fbriy 
long,  and  twenty  high.    At  the  end  of  Silliman^a  Avenue 
begins  Rhodes  Arcade ;  it  is  500  yards  long,  and  from  five 
to  ten  feet  high.     The  walls  and  ceiling  are  incrusted  with 
cryRtals  of  gypsum  and  carbonate  of  lime,  of  great  and  inde- 
scribable beauty ;  the  floor  is  covered  with  white  crystals  of 
limestone.     Lucy's  Dome  is  next  reached ;  it  is  about  sixty 
feet  in  diameter,  and  over  300  feet  in  height;  the  sides 
appear  to  be  composed  of  immense  curtains  extending  from 
the  ceiling  to  the  floor.     We  now  reach  the  pass  of  El  Ghor; 
it  is  about  two  miles  in  length.    The  objects  of  interest  in 
this  pass  are — ^The  Hanging  Rocks ;  they  look  as  if  they  were 
on  the  point  of  falling  and  closing  the  avenue  over  which 
they  are  suspended ;  but  no  rocks  from  the  walls  or  the  oeil- 
ing  have  been  known  to  fall  since  its  discovery.     The  Fly- 
chamber  ;  crystals  of  black  gypsum  the  size  of  a  fly  project 
in  great  numbers  from  the  ceiling.    The  Crown,  six  feet  in 
diameter,  closely  resembles  a  crown.     Corinna's  Dome  rests 
directly  over  the  centre  of  the  avenue,  forty  feet  high  and 
nine  feet  wide.     Stella's  Dome,  250  feet  in  height    The 
Chimes ;  when  struck,  these  rocks  emit  a  musical  sound.    We 
now  come  to  Martha's  Vineyard,  the  walls  and  ceiling  of 
which  are  studded  with  stalactitic  nodules  of  carbonate  of 
lime,  coloured  with  the  black  oxide  of  iron,  and  in  aiie  and 


MAMMOTH  CA  VES.  173 

appearance  resembling  grapes.    About  100  feet  from  this 

8{>ot  stands  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  a  natural  chapel  about  twelve- 

feet  square.     Then  we  come  to  Washington's  Hall ;  it  is 

circular,  and  about  100  feet  in  diameter.     We  then  pass 

through  the  Snowball-room,  the  ceiling  being  studded  with 

white  nodules  of  gypsum  resembling  snowballs.    We  now 

arrive  at  the  most  interesting  part .  of  the  cave,  Cleveland's 

Cabinet    It  is  a  perfect  arch  of  fifty  feet  span,  and  of  an 

average  height  of  ten  feet  in  the  centre,  extending  in  a  direct 

line  about  two  miles ;  it  is  incrusted  from  end  to  end  with 

the  most  beautifal  formations  of  every  variety.    The  base  of 

the  whole  is  sulphate  of  lime ;  some  of  the  incrustations  are 

massive  and  splendid,  others  are  delicate  as  the  lily.     The 

points  of  interest  in  Cleveland's  Avenue  are — Mary's  Bower, 

fifteen  feet  in  height  and  forty  in  length;  the  walls  and 

ceiling  are  covered  with  rosettes  of  gypsum.    Bosa's  Bower 

is  immediately  adjoining.    The  Cross  consists  of  two  crevices 

in  the  ceiling  intersecting  each  other  at  right  angles,  and 

covered  with  flowers  of  plaster  of  Paris  eight  feet  long.     The 

Last  Bose  of  Summer,  about  eight  inches  in  diameter,  is  of 

snowy  whiteness ;  it  rests  against  the  ceiling  in  the  centre 

of  the  avenue,  and  is  a  marvel  of  beauty.    Bacchus'  Glory, 

an  aloove  three  feet  high  and  five  feet  in  length,  lined  with 

nodules  of  gypsum  in   sise   and  form  resembling  grapes. 

St  Cedlia^s  Grotto  and  Diamond  Grotto  came  next    At  the 

termination  of  Cleveland's  Cabinet  we  arrive  at  the  base  of 

the  Bocky  Mountains,  some  100  feet  high,  and  is  entirely 

formed  of  rocks  that  have  fallen  from  above.     On  the  top  of 

it  is  a  stalagmite  two  feet  high  and  six  inches  in  diameter, 

called  Cleopatra's  Needle.     From  the  summit  of  the  Bocky 

Mountains  we  look  down  into  a  gorge  seventy  feet  deep  and 

100  feet  wide,  termed  Dismal  Horror.    Beyond  the  mountain 

we  enter  Crogan's  Hall,  which  constitutes  the  long  route ;  it 

is  about  seventy  feet  wide  and  twenty  feet  high.      We  had 

been  six  hours  in  the  cave,  and  were  now  nine  miles  from  the 

entrance  or  mouth ;  in  returning  we  were  only  four  hours, 

making  in  all  ten  hours,  the  whole  distance  travelled  being 

eighteen  miles.    The  temperature  of  the  cave  is  always  the 

same,  summer  and  winter,  SO*'  F.,  and  it  is  perfectly  dry 

eveiywhere,  with  the  exception  of  that  part  called  the  Infernal 


176  MAMMOTH  CA  VES. 

Eegion,  for  abont  two  miles.     Our  party,  men  and  women^ 
did  their  work  without  suffering  any  fatigue. 

The  foregoing  is  scarcely  more  than  a  dry  statement  of  the 
dimensions  of  the  several  avenues^  domes,  pits,  Ac  ^, 
forming  the  cave.  I  should  find  it  impossible  to  describe  the 
wondrous  beauty  of  it.  I  must  not,  however,  omit  to  men- 
tion one  adjunct  to  our  visit  to  the  cave,  which  few  persons 
are  so  fortunate  as  to  meet  with ;  I  allude  to  the  exquisite 
music^  the  result  of  the  union  of  a  large  number  of  good 
voices  among  the  school-teachers.  The  boats  had  to  make 
two  trips  in  carrying  us  all  across  the  Echo  Biver,  a  distance 
of  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile.  I  was  among  the  first 
carried  over,  and  in  consequence  was  in  a  position  to  enjoy  a 
treat  which  can  be  had  only  under  simUar  circumstances, 
and  in  the  Mammoth  Cave.  I  never  in  my  life  heard  any- 
thing to  equal  the  sweet  and  thrilling  music  that  came 
wafted  to  us  from  the  river  as  the  boat  noiselessly  approached 
the  landing  where  we  were  waiting  her  arrival.  There  was 
a  breathless  silence  among  my  party,  and  they  all  agreed 
that  they  had  never  heard  anything  half  so  beautifuL  The 
voices  of  the  singers  were  echoed  and  re-echoed  over  and  over 
again,  fainter  and  fainter,  whilst  we  unconsciously  strained 
our  ears  and  stayed  our  breath  to  catch  the  last  dying  tone. 
It  was  a  treat  never  to  be  forgotten.  The  route  we  had  gone 
over  is  called  by  the  guides  the  Long  Route,  so  the  next  day 
we  again  entered  the  cave  at  9.30  a.m.  for  the  purpose  of 
exploring  the  Short  Boute.  On  entering,  we  proceeded  about 
a  mile  by  the  same  route  we  pursued  the  previous  day  to  the 
Deserted  Chamber ;  here  we  turned  off  to  the  right,  descended 
a  flight  of  steps,  and  entered  the  Labyrinth,  a  narrow  rugged 
causeway.  A  view  of  Gorin's  Dome  is  now  gained  through  a 
small  natural  window.  It  is  about  200  feet  in  height,  and 
sixty  feet  across  its  widest  part  Next  came  Pensacola  Ave- 
nue ;  in  height  it  varies  from  eight  to  sixty  feet,  and  from 
thirty  to  a  hundred  in  width.  A  number  of  interesting  objects 
are  passed  in  this  avenue — the  Sea-Turtle,  the  Wild  Hall,  the 
Snowball-arched  Way,  the  Great  Crossing,  Mot's  Arc»de, 
150  feet  long,  thirty  wide,  and  sixty  in  height  Angelico 
Grotto,  the  ceiling  and  walls  in  crusted  with  crystals  of  car* 
bonate  of  lime,  is  a  beautiful  apartment    Spark's  AvenuCi 


MAMMOTH  CA  VES.  1 7  7 

three-quarters  of  a  mile.     The  objectB  in  this  avenue  are — 
Bandit's  Hall,  sixty  feet  long  and  forty  wide;  Newman's 
Spine,  Sylvan  Avenue,  about  300    yards  in    length ;    the 
Mammoth  Dome,  250  feet  in  height ;  here  are  five  large  pil- 
lars cut  out  of  the  solid  rock,  called  the  Corinthian  Columns. 
After  passing  many  other  interesting  objects,  we  come  to  the 
Star  Chamber,  sixty  feet  in  height,  seventy  in  width,  and 
about  500  in  length.     The  sights  and  illusions  of  the  Star 
Chamber  are  really  wonderful.    The  Cloud  Boom  is  a  quarter 
of  a  mile  in  length,  and  in  height  corresponds  with  the  Star 
Chamber.  Next  comes  Proctor's  Arcade,  a  magnificent  tunnel, 
a  hmidred  feet  wide,  forty-five  high,  three-quarters  of  a  mile 
long;  the  ceiling  is  smooth  and  the  walls  vertical.    Wright's 
Botonda  is  now  entered ;  it  is  400  feet  in  its  shortest  diame- 
ter ;  the  ceiling  from  ten  to  forty-five  feet  high,  perfectly 
lerel,  and  looks  as  if  it  had  been  plastered ;  the  irregularity 
of  the  floor  causes  the  difference  in  the  height.     The  Fox 
Arenue,  500  feet  long.    We  now  enter  the  Fairy  Grotto ;  it 
contains  a  countless  number  of  stalagmites,  reaching  from 
the  floor  to  the  roof  at  irregular  distances,  and  of  most  fan- 
tastic shapes,  some  straight,  some  crooked,  some  large  and 
hoUoWy  forming  irregularly-fluted  columns.     What  is  called 
the  Chief  City  is  beyond  the  Rocky  Pass,  about  200  feet  in 
diameter  and  forty  in  height.     The  floor  in  parts  is  covered 
vith  piles  of  rock,  presenting  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  city. 
We  now  passed  to  the  Temple,  a  vault  covering  an  area  of 
tvo  acres,  covered  by  a  single  dome  of  solid  rock  120  feet 
Ugh.    From  the  Chief  City  to  the  end  of  the  main  cave  is 
thiee  miles.    The  main  cave  is  terminated  abruptly  by  rocks 
that  have  fallen  from  above.      Retracing  our  steps,  we  enter 
the  Qothic  Arcade ;  two  mummies,  an  Indian  woman  and 
child,  were  found  in  this  grotto,  sitting  in  an  upright  posi- 
tion in  a  niche  in  the  wall.    The  Gothic  Arcade  is  about  forty 
ieet  wide,  fifteen  high,  and  two  miles  long ;   the  ceiling  is 
smooth  and  white,  as  if  it  had  been  carefully  plastered.    We 
iM>w  take  in  succession  the  Register  Room  and  the  Gothic 
Chapel ;  the  former  is  300  feet  long,  forty  wide,  and  eight  to 
sixteen  in  height ;  the  ceiling  is  white  and  smooth.      In  the 
ehapel  are  huge  masses  of  stalactites  hanging  from  the  ceU- 
Xhg.    Vulcan's  Snuthy  follows,  a  room  the  floor  of  which  is 

M 


178  MAMMOTH  CA  VES^-EYELESS  FISH. 

strewed  with  stalagmitic  nodules  coloured  with  black  oxiide 
of  iron,  resembling  the  cinders  of  a  blacksmith's  forge.  The 
DeviPs  Armchair  is  an  object  of  interest;  it  is  told  that 
Jenny  Lind  rested  in  this  chair  on  her  visit  to  this  csTe. 
The  Elephant's  Head  is  a  large  stalagmite  projecting  frcaa 
the  wall.  A  rock  projecting  sixteen  feet  over  a  pit  seventy 
feet  deep  is  called  the  Lover's  Leap.  We  now  enter  Elbow 
Crevice ;  the  avenue  is  three  to  five  feet  wide,  fifty  feet  higb, 
and  twenty  in  length.  It  is  another  Fat  Man's  Misery. 
Gateswood  Dining-Table  and  Ilapoleon's  Dome  come  next; 
this  latter  is  fifty  feet  high  and  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet 
broad.  Lake  Purity  is  right  under  Vulcan's  Smithy,  llie 
Gk>thic  Arcade  terminates  half  a  mile  beyond  Lake  Polity 
in  a  dome  and  small  cascade.  This  was  the  end  of  our  Short- 
Route  exploration,  perhaps  five  miles  firom  the  entrance  of 
the  cave.  We  now  retraced  our  steps,  and  it  was  three 
o'clock  when  we  returned  to  the  open  air,  having  been  in  the 
cave  six  hours. 

Small  eyeless  fish,  never  above  eight  inches  in  lengtb, 
and  small  cray-fish,  also  eyeless,  are  found  in  Echo  BiveL 
Mute  crickets,  lizards,  and  a  peculiar  kind  of  rat,  are  met 
with  in  the  cave,  as  are  also  bats  in  the  winter  season.  Ob 
our  first  day's  exploration  we  had  a  band  with  us,  and  some 
dancing  took  place  in  the  cave.  The  ladies  were  so  little 
fatigued  by  their  explorations,  that  on  both  occasions  thej 
had  a  dance  at  the  hotel  after  coming  firom  the  csre. 
Yesterday,  on  our  way  to  take  the  train  for  Louisville  at 
Glasgow  Junction,  we  visited  Proctor's  Gave,  situated  four 
miles  from  the  station.  About  three  miles  of  this  cave  are 
open  to  the  public.  The  stalactitic  formations  in  it 
are  very  beautiful,  and  in  endless  variety.  Mr  Proctor  toU 
me  that  there  were  already  known  to  the  guides  in  the 
Mammoth  Cave  passages  measuring  together  250  milfls. 
He  had  himself,  he  told  me,  travelled  over  seventy-five  duIibb 
in  this  cave. 

On  reaching  Louisville  on  the  3d,  we  saw  the  last  of  our 
pleasant  companions.     They  took   the  boat   on  the  Ohio 
for  Cincinnati ;  we  went  to  the  Gralt  Hotel,  and  the  neit 
morning  took  the  train  for  Chicago,  where  we  arrived  ia  ' 
fourteen  and  a  half  hours ;  and  here  we  are  at  the  Shermm 


CHICAGO— OMAHA.  179 

Eotely  in  hopes  of  leaving  at  10  a.m.  on  the  5th  for  San 
Francisco. 

l(Mi,  Salt  Lake  City. — Chicago,  which  thirty-seven  years 

igo  contained  only  400  inhabitants,  including  employes  of 

the  State  Qovemment  and  the  military,  now  reckons  300,000 

inhabitants,  and  is,  I  should  say,  one  of  the  best-built  cities 

of  the  Union.     The  streets  are  wide,  and  all  at  right  angles, 

tnd  many  of  them  well  paved.    There  are  two  public  parks 

—one,  Lincoln's  Park,  is  prettily  laid  out,  and  neatly  kept. 

As  for  churches,  they  are  literally  crowded  together,  and 

vie  with  each  other  in  the  costliness  of  their  construction. 

I  visited  one  of  the  large  elevators.     The  proprietor  told  me 

they  could  take  in  in  twelve  hours  150,000  bushels  of  grain, 

ind  deliver  or  put  on  board  ship  250,000  bushels ;  and  all 

ibis  work  is  accomplished  by  simple  machinery,  with  the 

Iielp  of  some  half-dozen  men.     They  weigh  800  bushels  com 

it  a  time  by  steelyards.     The  building  is  a  great  mass  of 

vood  and  wooden  shooting  six  stories  high.     There  was  no 

work  going  on  in  the  killing  and  curing  establishment,  the 

vetther  being  too  warm  for  the  performance  of  such  an 

operation.    What  with  the  4th  July  and  the  Sunday  inter- 

leaing,  we  could  not  manage  to  get  away  from  Chicago 

mtil  10.30  on  the  morning  of  the  6th.     We  arrived  at 

Qgden  on  the  9th,  and  two  hours  afterwards  we  were  at 

Slit  Lake  City. 

From  Chicago  to  Omaha  (492  miles)  we  rode  in  one  of 

Pallman's  sleeping-cars,  and  at  Omaha  we  changed  into  one 

tf  Pollman's  drawing-room  sleepiug-cars,  with  a  diniug-room 

md  kitchen-car  attached ;  so  that  from  Omaha  to  Ogden  we 

ite,  drank,  and  slept  ^^  on  board  "  the  train.    These  two  cars 

tere  handsomely  fitted  up,  and  extra  strong  in  construction, 

the  drawing-car  having  cost  £5000,  and  the  dining-room  car 

Marly  £4000.     Li  the  former  twenty-four  beds  were  made 

l^,and  there  was  a  piano ;  in  the  latter,  twenty-four  persons 

fined.     The  whole  affair  was  very  complete  and  comfortable. 

Oknaha  stands  on  the  Missouri  river,  966  feet  above  the  sea, 

ind  it  may  be  said  that  up  to  Sherman,  the  highest  point 

m  the  line  (8242  feet),  the  rise  is  gradual  all  the  way,  the 

lietanoe  being  549  miles.      All  the  way  from  Omaha  to 

KTahaatch^  a  distance  of  966  miles,  with  the  exception  of 


i8o  SALT  LAKE  CITY. 

some  few  points  before  coming  to  Wahaatcb,  the  country  is 
flat  and  uninteresting,  though,  to  be  snre,  we  had  a  glimpse 
of  the  Bocky  Mountains  in  the  distance,  with  here  and  there 
a  patch  of  snow  upon  them ;  but  from  Wahaatch  to  Devil's 
Gate  (fifty-three  miles)  the  line  runs  through  a  narrow 
valley,  with  a  river  (the  Weber)  in  all  its  course,  with  high 
picturesque  hills  and  overhanging  sandstone  cliffs  on  both 
sides  the  whole  way.  Between  Echo  and  Weber  stations  we 
passed  a  pretty  large  fir-tree  standing  alone,  1000  miles  from 
Omaha,  and  called  the  Thousand-mile  Tree.  From  Devil's 
Gate  to  Ogden  (fifteen  miles)  there  is  a  fall  of  500  feet,  and 
at  Ogden  the  height  above  the  sea  is  only  4340  feet,  the  dis- 
tance from  Omaha  being  1032  miles,  and  from  San  Francisco 
882  miles.  Hitherto,  on  the  main  line,  we  have  been  travel- 
ling on  the  Union  Pacific  Bailroad.  At  Ogden  commences 
the  Central  Pacific  Bailroad,  and  extends  as  far  as  Sacra- 
mento, 138  miles  from  San  Francisco;  and  over  this  latter 
distance  the  line  is  called  the  Western  Pacific  Railroad. 
We  went  this  morning  to  the  Old  Tabernacle,  a  building  in 
which  between  three  to  four  thousand  persons  might  find 
seats.  We  heard  two  Mormons,  Bishop  BoUo  and  Mr  Gar- 
rington,  preach — ^nothing  very  striking  in  either  of  them. 
The  latter  had  lately  returned  from  a  mission  to  Europe ;  he 
abused  the  French  people  in  unmeasured  terms,  and  was  not 
at  all  complimentary  to  any  of  the  European  peoples.  In 
our  cathedral  towns,  he  said,  great  darkness  prevailed,  but 
still  he  had  some  hope  that  the  deluded  inhabitants  might 
yet  be  brought  to  see  the  light,  for  some  very  zealous  men 
were  working  hard  there  in  the  cause  of  truth.  He  supported 
the  doctrine  of  a  plurality  of  wives  by  a  novel  argument. 
He  said,  where  there  was  one  good  Latter-day  Saint  among 
the  men,  there  were  many  among  the  women ;  and  as  these 
were  the  only  people  that  should  marry,  a  great  many  women 
who  deserve  to  have  husbands  would  have  to  do  without  them 
unless  a  man  was  permitted  to  have  more  wives  than  one.  A 
man,  he  said,  did  not  necessarily  take  to  himself  more  than 
one  wife ;  he  himself,  he  said,  had  been  permitted  by  Presi- 
dent Brigham  Toung  to  take  a  wife  in  Europe  (he  had 
already  one  wife),  but  he  had  not  done  so.  Perhaps,  he  said, 
as  he  was  an  elderly  man,  that  might  have  had  something  to 


MORMON  PRE  A  CHERS.  1 8 1 

do  with  his  determination  to  content  himself  with  the  one  he 

hai    The  women  part  of  the  congregation  tittered  at  this 

declaration,  and  I  daresay  the  preacher  was  not  far  out  in  the 

conclusion  he  had  come  to.     He  was  a  fluent  speaker,  but 

aggmned  a  good  deal  upon  which  to  rest  his  arguments.     In 

the  afternoon  we  went  to  the  New  Tabernacle,  a  building 

erected  four  years  ago,  and  capable  of  seating  1 3,000  people, 

we  were  told.      Here  we  heard   Elder  Pratt,   one  of  the 

Mormon  great  guns,  who  gave  us  the  history  of  Mormonism, 

its  commencement  and  its  rise,   and  told  us  how  it  had 

wffered  persecution  at  the  hands  of  the  Gentiles.     In  1827, 

I  think  he  said,  it  was  that  Joe   Smith  found  the  brass 

tablets  with  the  written  law  engraved  on  them  in  a  language 

which  he  only  had  the  power  of  interpreting.     It  was  not, 

he  said,  until  1830  that  a  translation  of  this  written  law  was 

published,  and  at  that  time  there  were  but  half-a-dozen  per- 

wna  who  supported  the  new  creed.     The  number  of  converts 

increased,  and  when  they  were  driven  out  of  Illinois  in  1847, 

the  first  batch  of  pioneers  who  accompanied  Brigham  Young 

to  Salt  Lake  Valley  numbered  147  persons,  but  they  were 

won  followed  by  100  more.     Now  their  numbers  in    the 

territory  of  Utah  alone  reached  125,000!     What  stronger 

proof  could  be  required  of  the  truth  of  the  doctrine  held  by 

the  Latter-day  Saints  than  this  unparalleled  success  in  the 

teeth  of  constant  persecution  ?    In  support  of  the  practice  of 

«  plurality  of  wives,  he  quoted  extensively  from  the  Bible  to 

show  that  in  olden  times  the  practice  had  always  existed 

tmong  God's  people ;  and  he  stated  that  the  early  Christians 

had  been  led  away  from  the  practice  by  following  the  forms 

ot  the  Greeks  and  Romans  of  only  taking  one  wife ;    but 

there  was  no  warrant  in  Scripture  for  such  a  practice.     He 

supported  his  argument  by  stating  that  in  the  census  of  the 

United  States,  taken  in  1860,  it  was  shown  that  Massachu- 

aetts  contained  35,000  females  between  fifteen  and  thirty 

years  of  age   beyond  the    number  of  males ;    New   York, 

61,000;   and  Pennsylvania,  30,000  more.     If  each  man  was 

only  to  take  one  wife,  all  these  females  of  marriageable  age 

must  live  and  die  in  single  blessedness.     Could  God  ever 

have  intended  this  ?    No.     His  commands  were  to  go  forth, 

increase,  and  multiply,  and  people  the  whole  earth.     How 


i83  TABERNACLE— FINE  ORGAN. 

could  this  be  accomplished  unless  a  plurality  of  wives  were 
permitted  ?  They  were  now  threatened  by  the  United  States 
Government  with  pains  and  penalties  if  they  did  not  abandon 
the  practice  of  a  plurality  of  wives.  They  were  ready  to  suffer 
for  the  truth ;  they  were  supported  by  God,  and  they  had  no 
fears  for  the  result  of  the  conflict  Elder  Pratt  is  a  man 
bordering  on  seventy,  and  has  the  exterior  of  a  hard-headed 
Scotchman ;  and  I  am  told  there  are  many  Scotchmen  among 
the  Mormons.  The  service  in  both  tabernacles  commenced 
with  prayer,  then  came  a  hymn,  and  the  discourse  or  lecture 
followed,  the  service  closing  with  prayer.  Iced  water  was 
fireely  handed  round  among  saints  and  Gentiles  during  the 
service.  In  the  large  tabernacle  at  afternoon  service  large 
piles  of  bread,  covered  up  with  napkins  on  the  altar,  at  the 
commencement  of  the  service,  were  uncovered,  and  broken 
into  small  pieces  by  half-a-dozen  of  the  elders,  put  into 
handsome  silver  baskets,  and  handed  round  to  the  saints. 
This,  I  suppose,  is  called  administering  the  Sacrament.  On 
a  raised  dais  or  platform  behind,  and  extending  away  on  each 
side  of  the  altar,  were  seated  the  elders,  some  of  them  in  their 
shirt-sleeves,  and  numbering  perhaps  fifty  or  sixty.  A  very 
fine  organ,  forty-eight  feet  high,  built  in  the  tabernacle, 
stands  behind  the  altar.  The  congregation  was  seated  upon 
raised  benches  in  the  body  of  the  building  and  in  the  gallery, 
which  extends  all  along  both  sides  and  round  one  end.  The 
ceiling,  starting  from  the  floor  in  the  shape  of  a  hsdf  circle, 
is  without  any  support  in  the  centre.  I  was  told  it  was 
wholly  of  wood,  tied  together,  and  was  seven  feet  in  thick- 
ness and  forty  feet  high.  There  is  no  ornamentation  what- 
ever in  the  building.  Besides  these  two  tabernacles  there 
are  many  other  places  of  worship,  Episcopalian,  Methodist^ 
&c.,  in  Salt  Lake  City;  and  within  the  square,  enclosing  an 
eighth  of  a  mile  in  extent,  in  which  the  two  tabernacles 
stand,  Brigham  is  now  building  a  massive  temple  of  grey 
granite,  187  feet  by  ninety,  which,  if  ever  completed,  will  be 
a  handsome  structure. 

The  city  is  located  in  the  Salt  Lake  Valley,  some  fifteen 
miles  from  the  lake,  which  is  a  hundred  miles  long  and  forty- 
five  miles  broad.  The  streets  are  some  140  feet  wide,  and 
intersect  each  other  at  right  angles,  and  have  a  plentiful  supply 


\ 


SALT  LAKE  CITY-'BRIGHAM  YOUNG,         183 

of  water  coming  from  the  hills,  ranning  through  most  of  them. 
Eferj  house  has  a  garden  attached  to  it^and  trees  are  plenti- 
fbllf  mixed  up  with  the  buildings,  principally  of  brick,  and 
placed  some  with  their  fronts  to  the  street,  some  with  the 
gables,  some  close  to  the  boundary  of  the  street,  others  stand- 
ing back  many  yards ;  in  fact,  there  is  throughout  a  perfect 
irr^Iarity  in  the  buUdings,  which  is  really  charming. 
Brigham's  house  is  a  handsome  building,  with  a  spread  eagle 
orerthe  entrance  gateway,  and  a  beehive  conspicuously  placed 
on  the  summit  of  the  roof,  typifying  industry.  The  city  con- 
taioB  25,000  inhabitants.  The  Jordan  river  takes  its  rise  in 
Utah  Lake,  about  thirty-five  miles  from  the  city,  and  passes 
within  a  mile  of  it  In  its  course  it  receives  many  tributary 
Btreams  from  the  hills,  and  empties  itself  into  the  Salt  Lake. 
It  ia  a  considerable  stream  of  water,  probably  of  an  average 
breadth,  where  it  passes  the  city,  of  150  feet.  Like  its  name- 
take  in  Palestine,  it  empties  into  a  lake  so  salt  that  no  fish 
can  live  in  it,  holding  as  it  does  in  solution  twenty-five  per 
cent  of  common  salt.  They  say  that  the  Salt  Lake  has  under- 
gone a  permanent  rise  of  ten  feet  within  the  last  thirty  years, 
which  would  seem  to  show  that  the  fresh  water  that  flows  into 
it  more  than  makes  up  for  the  waste  caused  by  evaporation. 

ll^L — I  had  a  good  view  of  the  city  and    the    whole 
valley  this  morning  from  the  roof  of  the  New  Tabernacle, 
p     which  I  was  permitted  to  ascend  through  the  kindness  of 
a  man    in  authority,  an  Englishman,  who  had  been  with 
the  English  army  in  Egypt     Hills  encompass  the  city  in 
three-fourths  of  its  extent.     They  are  at  various  distances, 
and  the  highest  is  11,000  and  odd  feet  above  the  sea.     The 
eity  itself  is  about  4500  feet  above  the  sea.    The  appearance 
of  the  valley  put  me  in  mind  of  the  valley  in  which  Damas- 
cus is  situated,  when  entered  by  coming  over  the  hills  from 
the  north ;  and  it  will  be  more  like  it  still  when  the  trees 
the  Mormons  have  abundantly  planted  in  it  have  attained  a 
larger   growth.     Accompanied   by    some    friends   from   the 
Townsend  Hotel,   I   visited   this   morning   His  Excellency 
Brigham  Young,  who  received  us  very  courteously.     He  is 
in  stature  rather  short,  of  a  quiet  and  gentlemanly  manner, 
and  hardly  looks  sixty  years  of  age,  though  in  reality  he  is 
in  his   seventieth  year.     We  also  saw  at    the  same  time 


i84  WHITE  PINE  DISTRICT. 

George  Smith,  a  coasin  of  the  prophet.  Oar  visit  was  cat 
short  by  the  arrival  of  a  dozen  pretty  American  girls,  who 
came  to  satisfy  their  curiosity  by  making  the  acquaintance 
of  the  great  polygamist ! 

At  2.45  P.M.  yesterday  we  left  Salt   Lake  City,  and  at 
8.30  this  morning,  the  12th,  arrived   here  at  Elko,  where 
we  have  to  wait  until  5  p.m.  to  take  the  stage  for  the  White  * 
Fine  District,  on  our  visit  to  the  mines,  distant  about  120 
miles. 

Wth^  UamiUon  City^  White  Pine. — ^At  5  p.m.  on  the  12th 
we  took  our  seats  in  the  stage  at  Elko  for  this  mining  dis- 
trict,   an  old-fashioned    coach    on    leather    springs,  gaily 
painted,  holding  nine  inside,  though  we  were  but  six,  dnwn 
by  six   good-looking  horses,  and  driven  by  an  American. 
After  one  or  two  stoppages  to  pick  up  parcels,  we  got  fidrly 
off.    Our  fellow-passengers  were  three  Germans  and  an  Irish- 
man.   On  leaving  Elko  we  must  have  ascended  pretty  quickly 
1500  feet.     Afterwards  the  road  was  up  and  down  all  the  way 
until  we  approached  Hamilton,  when,  for  the  last  hour,  there 
was  a  considerable  and  constant  ascent.     Hamilton  is  nearly 
8000  feet   above  the    sea,    and   Treasure  City,    one  and  a 
half  miles  distant,  and  around  which  the  principal  silver 
mines  are  clustered,  stands  1600  feet  higher.     Elko,  whence 
we  have  come,  is  6030  feet  above  the  sea.    We  were  twenty- 
one  hours  on  the  road,  and  changed  horses  ten  times.    On 
the  whole  route  there  is  nothing  to  be  seen  but  brush,  sage 
everywhere  covering  the  ground,  the  whole  road  very  dusty. 
We  had  supper  and  breakfast  at  two  of  the  stations,  veiy 
well  served  up.    Five  Indians,  armed  with  bows  and  arrof^ 
crossed  our  track ;  but  in  this  neighbourhood  the  Indians,  I 
believe,  are  all  friendly.     We  had  one  break-down  whidi 
detained  us  half  an  hour.     The  road  is  rough,  but  nowhere 
dangerous.    This  mining  district  was  only  discovered  a  little 
more   than   a  year  ago,   and  there   are  already  two  cities 
of  wooden  houses,  containing  about  6000  inhabitants,  and 
the  mines  are  yielding  silver  ore  of  the  value  of  200,000 
dollars  a  month,  principally  chloride-silver  and  argentiferous 
galena.     The  principal  part  of  the  galena  is  smelted  here, 
and  transmitted  to  New  York  and  to  Swansea  in  the  sh^ie 
of  pig-lead.     The  free  ores  (the  chlorides)  are  all,  I  believe. 


SILVER  MINES.  185 

cnuhed  here,  and  the  silver  extracted  by  the  qnicksilver  of 
azodgamatiou  process.  There  are  numerous  smelting  estab- 
lishments and  cmshing-mills  erected  that  do  this  work  on 
toll,  but  the  principal  mines  have  their  own  particular  mills. 
In  bar-silver,  the  monthly  produce,  some  175,000  dollars,  is 
sent  to  San  Francisco  and  New  York. 

IWu — Under  the  guidance  of  Mr  Benjamin,  who  has  the 
control  and  management  of  the  South  Aurora  Mine,  situated  at 
Treasure  Hill,  between  the  Eberhardt  and  the  North  Aurora 
Mine,  we  yesterday  proceeded  to  Treasure  Hill,  and  spent 
pretty  nearly  the  whole  day  in  visiting  the  work  going  on  in 
the  South  Aurora  and  at  the  mill  appertaining  thereto,  dis- 
tant from  the  mine  four  miles,  down  a  descent  of  two  thou- 
sand feet,  but  as  the  crow  flies  only  one  and  a  half  miles  off, 
and  in  looking  at  the  Eberhardt  and  North  Aurora  Mines, 
lately  purchased  by  a  company  in  London,  but  in  which  all 
work  is  at  present  suspended.     In  the  South  Aurora  Mine 
the  lode  is  of  "  any"  width,  and  the  work  we  saw  going  on 
there  was  simply  quarrying,  digging  out  big  pockets  of  ore, 
»nd  they  have  nowhere  yet  gone  deeper  than  forty  feet.  They 
Diay  go  2000  feet  without  risk  of  the  mine  being  drowned. 
There  are  seventy  miners  at  work,  each  earning  five  dollars  a 
day,  and  they  take  out  on  an  average  forty-two  tons  ore  daily, 
which  is  carried  to  the  mill  in  "  prairie  schooners,"  or  huge 
waggons  drawn  by  mules  and  oxen.     The  ores  vary,  they  tell 
i&e,from  forty  dollars  up  to  1600  dollars  a  ton,  but  the  ordin- 
tty  yield  is  sixty  dollars  a  ton :  the  lode  runs  north  and  south, 
tnd  the  quantity  of  ore  in  sight  is  large.     The  whole  forty- 
two  tons  ore  is  crushed  at  the  mill  day  by  day,  and  the  silver 
produced  is  every  other  day  run  into  bars,  and  sent  off  to  San 
Francisco.     We  saw  yesterday  two  bars  sent  off  together, 
Talne  3500  dollars.     The  average  yield  of  the  mine  at  pres- 
ent, they  say,  is  65,000  dollars  a  month,  of  which,  I  am  told, 
40,000  dollars  a  month   is  profit     As  the   workings   get 
deeper,  short  tunnels  are  driven  in  to  meet  them,  and  the 
ore  is  put  into  small  cars  and  carried  out  on  a  tramway,  and 
there  put  into  the  waggons  for  conveyance  to  the  mill.     The 
whole  cost  of  mining  the  ore  (blasting  principally)  is  covered, 
it  is  said,  by  twenty  dollars  a  ton.     When  we  had  finished 
at  the  mine,  we  proceeded  to  the  mill,  over  a  good  road,  a 


I S6  CR  USHING- MILL-RETURN  TO  ELKO. 

distance  of  four  miles.     We  passed  on  the  way  two  waggou 
drawn  by  ten  yoke  of  oxen  and  twenty  mules,  laden  with 
fifty-four  tons  ore.     The  mill  is  what  is  called  a  dry  miU, 
that  is,  the  ore  is  crushed  dry,  and  passes  in  that  state 
through  sieves  or  screens  so  fine  that  it  comes  through  m 
an  almost  impalpable  powder ;  it  is  then  shovelled  into  large 
tubs  filled  with  water ;  a  jet  of  steam  is  introduced  into  each 
tub,  and  the  whole  is  kept  in  motion  by  a  150-horse  steam- 
engine  until  the  quicksilver  which  has  been  introduced  into 
the  tubs  becomes  thoroughly  amalgamated  with  the  silver 
contained  in  the  ore,  when  it  finds  its  way  into  the  lower 
part  of  the  mill.     Every  two  days'  milling,  after  the  quick- 
silver has  been  driven  off  in  a  retort,  is  melted  into  bars  aad 
sent  off,  as  before  stated,  for  San  Francisco.     The  quicksilvei 
costs  here  seventy-five  dollars  a  quintal.     The  waterworks  at 
Hamilton  have  been  executed  at  a  cost  of  275,000  dollars; 
and  the  monthly  cost  of  pumping  by  steam  is  50,000  dollars ; 
they  supply  the  town  and  some  of  the  mines  with  water. 
These  waterworks  do  credit  to  the  Hamiltonians,  inasmucb 
as  the  place  is  hardly  a  year  old  yet    From  the  South  Aurora 
Mine  we  went  into  the  Eberhardt  Mine ;  doubtless  a  good 
deal  of  fair  ore  has  been  extracted,  but  whether  or  not,  on 
being  re-opened,  much  rich  ore  will  be  found,  is  a  question 
to  be  settled  hereafter.     The  North  Aurora  Mine,  which  joiofl 
on  to  the  South  Aurora  Mine,  we  merely  looked  into  from  the 
latter,  from  one  of  the  workings  we  visited.     Both  mines  are 
upon  the  same  lode,  as  is  the  Eberhardt  also.    The  Eberhardt 
and  the  North  Aurora  now  beloug  to  an  English  companji 
and  have  just  been  taken  over  by  their  agent 

July  28^^,  at  Calaveras. — Big  trees. — On  the  16th  we  left 
the  White  Pine  District,  and  after  travelling  all  night  with 
a  drunken  cheap-jack  in  the  coach,  who  had  been  found  such 
a  nuisance  at  Hamilton  that  a  subscription  was  raised  to 
send  him  away,  we  reached  Elko  in  nineteen  hours,  a  dis- 
tance of  120  miles,  and  in  the  evening  took  the  train  for 
San  Francisco.  Next  morning  we  arrived  at  Sacramento. 
We  got  out  here,  and  remained  over  Sunday,  proceeding  on 
Monday  morning  to  San  Francisco,  where  we  put  up  at  the 
Cosmopolitan  Hotel.  The  next  day  we  left  San  Francisco  by 
rail  for  Stockton,  on  our  way  to  the  Tosemite  valley,  and  to  the 


YOSEMITE  VALLEY.  187 

big  trees.    From  Stockton,  where  the  rail  ends,  the  journey 
to  the  valley  is  accomplished  by  coach  and  on  horseback. 

We  visited  the  Mariposa  grove  of  big  trees  on  the  22d^  and 
on  the  28th  we  reached  the  Tosemite  valley,  stopping  on  the 
way  at  the  Great  Dome  which  overlooks  the  Yosemite  and  the 
glacier  rocks,  from  which  a  fine  view  is  obtained  right  down 
into  the  valley.  The  view  from  the  top  of  the  Great  Dome 
extends  over  a  large  extent  of  country,  and  is  quite  pano- 
nmia 

^^  The  Yosemite  valley  is  situated  a  little  south  of  east  from 
Ban  Francisco,  and  is  distant  from  that  city  155  miles  in  a 
direct  line,  but  by  either  of  the  routes  usually  travelled  it  is 
nearly  250  miles.     The  principal  features  of  the  Yosemite 
Tilley,  and  those  by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  all  other 
known  valleys  are — ^first,  the  near  approach  to  verticality  of 
its  walls ;  second,  their  great  height,  not  only  absolutely,  but 
•8  compared  with  the  width  of  the  valley  itself ;  and  finally, 
the  very  small  amount  of  talus  or  debris  at  the  base  of  these 
gigantic  cliffs.     These  are  the  great  characteristics  of  the 
losemite  throughout  its  whole   length ;  but  besides  these, 
tbere  are  many  other  striking  peculiarities  and  features,  both 
of  sublimity  and  beauty,  which  can  hardly  be  surpassed,  if 
equalled,  by  those  of  any  mountain  valley  in   the  world. 
Either  the  domes  or  the  waterfalls  of  the  Yosemite,  or  any 
single  one  of  them,  would  be  sufficient  in  any  European 
eoontry  to  attract  travellers  from  far  and  wide  in  all  direc- 
tions.    Waterfalls  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Yosemite,  surpass- 
iog  in  beauty  many  of  those  best  known  and  most  visited 
in  Europe,  are  actually  left  entirely  unnoticed  by  travellers 
because  there  are  so  many  other  objects  of  interest  to  be 
Tiaited,  that  it  is  impossible  to  find  time  for  them  all. 

'^  In  descending  the  Mariposa  trail,  a  steep  incline  of  2973 
feet  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  valley,  the  traveller  has  pre- 
sented to  him  a  succession  of  views  all  of  which  range  over 
the  whole  extent  of  the  principal  valley,  revealing  its  domi- 
nant features,  while  at  each  new  point  of  view  he  is  brought 
nearer,  and  as  it  were  more  face  to  face  with  these  gigantic 
objects.  The  principal  points  seen  present  themselves  as 
follows : — On  the  left  is  El  Capitan ;  on  the  right  the  Bridal 
Veil  Fall,  coming  down  behind  the  Cathedral  Rocks ;  and 


1 88  YOSEMITE  VALLEY. 

in  the  centre  the  view  of  the  valley,  and  beyond  into  the 
cafion  of  the  Tenaza  fork  of  the  Merced.  The  point  of  the 
Half  Dome  is  just  visible  over  the  ridge  of  which  Sentinel 
Bock  forms  a  part ;  and  beyond  it,  in  the  farthest  dis- 
tance, Clond's  Rest  is  seen.  A  general  idea  of  the  valley 
can  be  well  obtained  from  this  point  and  in  one  view ;  bat 
as  we  ride  up  between  the  walls,  new  objects  are  constantly 
becoming  visible,  which  at  the  lower  end  were  entirely  con- 
cealed. Of  the  cliffs  around  the  valley.  El  Capitan  and  the 
Half  Dome  are  the  most  striking ;  the  latter  is  the  higher, 
but  it  would  be  difficult  to  say  which  conveys  to  the  mind 
the  most  decided  impression  of  massiveness  and  grandeor. 
El  Capitan  is  an  immense  block  of  granite  projecting 
squarely  into  the  valley,  and  presenting  an  almost  vertical 
sharp  edge  3300  feet  in  elevation.  The  sides  or  walls  of  the 
mass  are  bare,  smooth,  and  entirely  destitute  of  vegetation ; 
it  is  almost  impossible  for  the  observer  to  comprehend  the 
enormous  dimensions  of  this  rock,  which  in  clear  weather  can 
be  distinctly  seen  from  the  San  Joaquin  plains,  a  distance 
of  some  fifty  or  sixty  miles.  Nothing,  however,  so  helps  to 
a  realisation  of  the  magnitude  of  these  masses  about  the 
Tosemite  as  climbing  around  and  among  them.  Let  the 
visitor  begin  to  ascend  the  pile  of  debris  which  lies  at  the 
base  of  El  Capitan,  and  he  will  soon  find  his  ideas  enlarged 
on  the  point  in  question,  and  yet  these  debris  piles  along 
the  cliffs,  and  especially  under  El  Capitan,  are  of  insignificant 
size  compared  with  the  dimensions  of  the  solid  rock  itself. 
They  are  hardly  noticeable  in  taking  a  general  view  of  the 
valley.  El  Capitan  imposes  on  us  by  its  stupendous  balk| 
which  seems  as  if  thrown  from  the  mountain  on  purpose  to 
stand  as  the  type  of  eternal  massiveness.  It  is  doubtfol  if 
anywhere  in  the  world  there  is  presented  so  squarely  cut,  so 
lofty,  and  so  imposing  a  face  of  rocks.  On  the  other  side  of 
the  valley  we  have  the  Bridal  Veil  Fall,  unquestionably  one 
of  the  most  beautiful  objects  in  the  Yosemite ;  it  is  formed 
by  the  creek  of  the  same  name,  which  rises  a  few  miles  east 
of  Empire  Camp,  runs  through  the  meadows  of  West  Falls, 
and  it  is  finally  precipitated  over  the  cliffs  on  the  west  side 
of  Cathedral  Ilock  into  the  Yosemite  in  one  leap  of  630  feet 
perpendicular.     The  water  here  strikes  on  a  sloping  pile  of 


YOSEMITE  VALLEY.  189 

debris,  down  which  it  rashes  in  a  series  of  cascades  for  a 
perpendicular  distance  of  300  feet  more,  the  total  height  of 
the  edge  of  the  fall  above  the  meadow  at  its  base  being  900 
feet.     The  effect  of  the  fall  everywhere  seen  from  this  valley 
is  as  if  it  were  900  feet  in  vertical  height,  its  base  being 
concealed  by  the  trees  which  surround  it     The  quantity  of 
water  in  the  Bridal  Veil  Fall  varies  greatly  with  the  season  ; 
in  May  and  June  the  amount  is  generally  at  its  maximum, 
and  it  generally  decreases  as  the    summer   advances;  the 
effect,  however,  is  finest  when  the  body  of  water  is  not  too 
heavy,  since  then   the  swaying  from  side  to  side,  and  the 
waving  under  the  varied  pressure  of  the  wind  as  it  strikes 
the  long  column  of  water,  is  more  marked.     As  seen  from  a 
distance,  at  such  times,  it  seems  to  flutter  like  a  white  veil, 
producing  an   indescribably   beautiful    effect.     The    name 
Bridal  Veil  is  poetical,  but  strictly  appropriate.     The  stream 
which  supplies  this  fall  heads  low  down  in  the  Sierra,  far 
below  the  region  of  eternal  snows ;  hence,  as  summer  ad- 
vances, the  supply  of  water  is  rapidly  diminished,  and  by  the 
middle  or  end  of  July  there  is  only  a  small  streamlet  trick- 
ling down  the  vertical  face  of  the  rocks,  over  which  it  is 
precipitated  in  a  bold  curve  when  the  quantity  of  water  is 
larger.    At  the  highest  stage  the  stream  divides  into  a  dozen 
streamlets  at  the  base  of  the  fall,  several  of  which  are  only 
just  fordable  on  horseback.     The  Virgin's  Tears   Creek,  on 
the  other  side  of  the  valley,  and  directly  opposite  the  Bridal 
Veil,  makes  also  a  fine  fall,  over   a   thousand  feet  high, 
included  in  a  deep  recess  of  the  rocks  near  the  lower  corner 
of  £1  Capitan.     This  is  a  magnificent  fall  as  long  as  it  lasts, 
but  the  stream  which  produces  it  dries  up  early  in  the  season. 
In  quantity  of  water,  elevation,  and  general  effect,  this  fall, 
hardly  spoken  of  at  the  Tosemite,  among  so  many  grander 
ones,  is  far  superior  to  the  celebrated  Shubback  in  Switzer- 
land. 

^^  Proceeding  up  the  valley,  we  find  on  the  same  side  as  the 
Bridal  Veil  the  prominent  and  massive  sculptured  pile  of 
granite  to  which  the  name  of  the  Cathedral  Rock  has  been 
given.  The  Merced  river  occupies  the  foreground;  the 
trees  on  the  middle  ground  are  pitch-pines,  from  125  to  150 
feet  high ;  and  those  which  seem  to  fringe  the  summit  of 


190  YOSEMITE  VALLEY. 

the  Cathedral  Eock  like  small  boshes,  are  in  reality  fira  and 
pines  as  tall  as  those  in  the  valley^  or  even  taller.  Cathe- 
dral Eock  is  not  so  high  nor  so  massive  as  El  Capitan,  nor 
are  its  sides  quite  as  vertical  The  summit  is  2260  feet 
above  the  valley.  Just  beyond  Cathedral  Bock,  on  the  same 
side,  are  the  graceful  pinnacles  of  rock  called  The  Spires. 
These  spires  are  isolated  columns  of  granite,  at  least  500 
feet  high,  standing  out  from,  but  connected  at  the  base 
with,  the  walls  of  the  valley.  They  are  kept  in  obscority, 
or  brought  out  into  wonderful  relief,  according  to  the 
different  way  the  light  or  shadow  falls  upon  them.  The 
whole  side  of  the  valley  along  this  part  of  it  is  fantastically 
but  exquisitely  carved  out  into  forms  of  gigantic  propor- 
tions, which  anywhere  .else  except  in  the  Yosemite  valley 
would  be  considered  as  objects  of  the  greatest  interest 
From  one  point  of  view,  these  spires  appear  symmetrical, 
of  equal  height,  squarely  cut,  and  rising  above  the  edge  of 
the  cliff  behind,  exactly  like  two  towers  of  a  (Gothic  cathe- 
dral. The  next  prominent  object  in  going  up  the  valley  is 
the  triple  group  of  rocks  known  as  the  Three  Brothers. 
These  rise  in  steps  one  behind  the  other,  tl^  highest  being 
3830  feet  above  the  valley.  From  the  summit  of  this  there 
is  a  superb  view  of  the  valley  and  its  surroundings.  The 
peculiar  outline  of  these  rocks,  as  seen  from  below,  resembling 
three  frogs  sitting  with  their  heads  turned  in  one  direction, 
is  supposed  to  have  suggested  the  Indian  name  ^  Pompom- 
posus ' — ^which  means,  we  are  informed,  leaping-frqg  rocks. 

"  Nearly  opposite  the  Three  Brothers  is  a  point  of  rocks 
projecting  into  the  valley,  the  termination  of  which  is  a 
slender  mass  of  granite.  This  is  called  the  Sentinel,  3043 
feet  above  the  valley,  and  is  one  of  the  grandest  masses  of 
rock  in  the  Yosemite. 

^'  From  near  the  foot  of  Sentinel  Bock,  looking  directly 
across  the  valley,  we  have  before  us  one  of  the  most  attrac- 
tive features  of  the  Yosemite — naniely,  the  Yosemite  Fall, 
the  vertical  height  above  the  valley  being  about  2600  feet 

^^  Next  is  the  North  Dome,  rising  to  3508  feet  above  the 
valley. 

^^  The  Half  Dome  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Tenaya  cafion 
is  the  loftiest  and  most  imposing  mass  in  the  valley.     It  is 


YOSEMITE  VALLEY— CALAVERAS.  191 

• 

not  80  high  as  Cloud's  Best,  but  the  latter  seems  rather  to 
belong  to  the  Sierra  than  to  the  Tosemite.  It  is  a  crest 
of  granite,  rising  to  the  height  of  4737  feet  above  the  valley. 
'^  Farther  ap  the  cafion  of  the  Tenaya  is  the  beautiful  little 
KiiTor  Lake,  an  expansion  of  the  Tenaya  fork.  It  is  fre- 
quently visited,  and  best  early  in  the  morning,  for  the  purpose 
of  getting  the  reflection  from  its  unruffled  surface  of  a  noble 
overhanging  mass  of  rock  to  which  the  name  of  Mount  Wat- 
king  has  been  given. 

*^  Farther  up  the  Tenaya  fork,  on  the  right,  is  Cloud's  Best. 
The  height  has  never  been  measured,  but  is  probably  1000 
feet  higher  than  the  Half  Dome,  or  nearly  10,000  feet  above 
sea-leveL 

<<  The  Vernal  Fall  comes  next,  and  afterwards  the  Nevada 
Fall,  perhaps  one  of  the  grandest  waterfalls  in  the  world, 
wliether  we  consider  its  vertical  height,  the  purity  and 
Tolome  of  the  river  which  forms  it,  or  the  stupendous 
soenery  by  which  it  is  environed. 

'^Iliere  are  altogether  1141  acres  of  land  in  the  valley 
proper,  of  which  745  are  meadow,  and  the  remainder  a  sandy 
wtQ  a  little  more  elevated,  partly  covered  with  a  sparse 
growth  of  forest  trees,  and  partly  with  pertinacious  ferns. 
The  elevation  of  the  bottom  of  the  valley  above  sea-level  is 
in  round  numbers  4000  feet." 

Calaveras. — I  have  spent  all  this  morning  (July  25th) 

wuidering  about  in  the  forest  among  the  big  trees.      The 

weather  if  delightful,  with  the  temperature  in  the  shade  about 

75°.     The  hotel  is  in  the  midst  of  the  forest,  I  might  almost 

iiy;  for  even   the  few  cleared  acres  in  its  front  are  well 

Btodded  with  trees,  pines  principally,  running  up  from  100 

to  200  feet  in  height,  the  big  trees  around,  all  within  half 

an  hour's  stroll  of  the  house.     There  are  in  all,  they  tell  me, 

ninety-three  trees,  from  ten  years'  growth  and  upwards.     In 

fact,  you  find  the  big  trees  here  in  all  stages.    There  are  the 

buried  trees,  brought  to  light  occasionally  by  accident,  which 

may  have  fiEdlen  thousands  of  years  ago,  and  which  are  still 

found  to  be  sound ;  there  are  some  lying  on  the  ground,  which 

must  have  fallen  hundreds  of  years  ago,  for  other  trees  of  the 

pitch-pine  and  the  sugar-pine   species  of  a  hundred  years' 

growth  or  morci  have  grown  up  where  some  of  these  big 


192  CALAVERAS— BIG  TREES. 

trees,  now  partly  destroyed,  must  have  covered  the  groimd  -r 
when  they  fell.  There  are  many  monsters  partly  destroyed 
hy  fire  lying  about ;  one  of  them — the  father  of  the  forest—  • 
measures  112  feet  at  the  base,  and  can  be  traced  SOO  feet, 
where  it  seems  to  have  been  broken  by  falling  agminst  an- 
other tree;  it  here  measures  sixteen  feet  in  diameter,  and  might 
be  fairly  put  down  as  having  reached  450  feet  in  height.  It 
is  hollow,  burnt  out  for  a  distance  of  200  feet,  for  a  great 
part  of  which  two  men  on  horseback  may  ride  abreast.  Then, 
again,  you  have  some  that  have  fallen  of  late  years,  which 
are  being  sawn  into  lengths  of  about  seven  feet,  and  then 
split  up  into  pieces  four  to  six  inches  thick,  to  be  used  as 
posts.  This  wood  is  said  to  be  very  durable ;  it  is  heavy, 
and  full  of  sap  when  first  cut  up,  but  in  time,  when  the  sap 
has  drained  out  of  it,  it  becomes  extremely  light.  The  sap 
runs  from  it  when  fresh  cut,  like  so  much  wine,  and  the 
wood  has  then  a  yellowish  appearance,  but  loses  it  with  the 
loss  of  sap  and  exposure  to  the  action  of  the  atmosphere,  and 
then  becomes  red.  Next  you  have  the  upstanding  trees,  the 
larger  number  averaging  from  twelve  to  fifteen  feet  in  diameter, 
and  from  260  to  300  feet  in  height  After  these  come  the 
giants  of  the  forest,  still  in  full  vigour,  though  some  of 
them  have  been  partially  burnt  about  the  trunk.  All  these 
measure  upwards  of  fifteen  feet  in  diameter,  eight  or  ten  feet 
from  the  ground,  and  one  I  measured  was  twenty-one  feet 
in  diameter  at  that  height  from  the  ground.  I  think  the 
largest  standing  sequoia  in  the  forest — for  it  stands  up  still — 
is  the  tree  tliat  furnished  the  bark  for  the  Sydenham  Ciys- 
tal  Palace.  It  has  been  stripped  to  the  height  of  116  feet 
Near  the  top  a  small  green  tree  is  seen,  which  has  taken  root 
^  in  the  body  of  the  big  tree,  and  seems  bent  (so  vigorously  it 
grows)  upon  coming  to  something.  This  bare  tree  is  327  feet 
high.  I  measured  it  round  about  ten  feet  from  the  ground, 
and  found  it  to  be  sixty-one  feet  in  circumference ;  and,  with  the 
bark  on,  it  must  have  been  twenty-three  to  twenty-four  feet 
in  diameter.  This  tree  is  called  The  Mother.  Many,  indeed 
all  the  larger  trees,  have  been  named.  In  1853,  one  of  the 
largest  trees  in  the  grove  was  cut  down.  It  took  five 
men  twenty-five  days  to  fell  it  They  worked  with  augen. 
The    stump  of    this  tree  has   been  smoothed   off,  and  a 


BIG  TREES— SOUTH  CALAV£R4S.  193 

'^oom  built  oyer  it,  the  tree  forming  the  floor,  on  which 
thirty-two  couple  of  dancers  may  find  room.  I  found  it  to 
be,  across  the  floor,  nearly  twenty-five  feet  in  diameter, 
80  that,  with  the  bark  on,  this  tree  must  have  measured 
twenty-eigBt  feet.  In  one  tree  now  being  sawn  up,  the  bark 
IS  found  enclosed  in  more  than  one  place;  and  in  one 
instance,  a  squirrel's  nest  was  overtaken  by  the  rapid  growth 
of  the  tree,  and  enclosed  well  inside  the  bark.  Where  they 
are  now  sawing  this  tree,  it  is  eight  feet  in  diameter,  and  the 
centre  of  the  concentric  rings  is  only  two  feet  from  one  edge, 
whilst  it  is  six  feet  from  the  opposite  edge.  This  peculiarity 
is  accounted  for  by  the  fact  of  another  tree  having  grown  up 
Tery  close  to  this  one,  and  probably  impeded  the  growth  of 
this  tree  on  one  side.  One  hardly  realises  the  full  size  of 
these  big  trees  whilst  they  are  standing ;  it  is  only  when 
stretched  upon  the  ground  that  one  becomes  impressed 
by  their  monstrous  dimensions.  The  pines  and  the  cedars 
growing  round  about  the  big  trees  are  also  very  large,  the 
former  often  attaining  nine  to  ten  feet  in  diameter  and  200 
feet  in  height.  They  are  beautiful  trees  these  growing  pines, 
so  clean  in  their  growth,  and  as  straight  as  an  arrow. 

Another  grove  of  big  trees,  about  seven  miles  from  Cal- 
averas, has  hardly  yet  been  explored.     On  the  morning  of 
29th  July  I  started  with  my  landlord,  Mr  Perry,  to  pay  it  a 
visit.     The  road  or  trail  is  through  forest  all  the  way,  over 
hill  and  dale.     About   half  way  we  came  to  the  river  St 
Stanislaus,  which  we  crossed  on  a  bridge  that  had  just  been 
thrown  over  it.     Clouds  of  dust  ahead  in  the  distance  told  us 
there  was  a  stir  among  a  flock  of  sheep  (3300)  which  we  knew 
had  passed  that  way  a  day  or  two  before,  and  we  soon  found 
I,    oarselyes  in  their  midst.    We  then  learned  that  a  grisly  bear 
'      had  got  in  among  the  flock  the  night  before,  had  eaten  one 
*     Rheep,  pretty  well  "  chawed  up "  three  or  four  others,  and 
^    had  scattered  the  flock  far  and  wide  throughout  the  forest. 
When  we  came  upon  them,  they  were  being  gathered  together 
from  all  points,  and  they  kicked  up,  consequently,  a  con- 
siderable dust    This  flock  of  sheep  belongs  to  a  Mrs  Parker, 
*  widow,  who  travels  with  the  flock,  accompanied  by  half-a- 
dozen  children,  from  four  to  fourteen  years  of  age.     She  is 
English,  and  came  over  young  to  California  a  few  years  ago 


w 


194  SOUTH  CALAVERAS. 

from  Australia,  and  married  a  Oftlifornian.  She  is  stiQ 
young  and  good-looking,  rides  the  wildest  of  Califomiaii 
horses,  and  manages  her  flock  of  sheep  with  much  success. 
She  brings  them  up  into  this  wild  region  in  summer ;  and 
when  winter  approaches,  carries  them  back  again  to  the 
plains  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Stockton.  In  California  they 
shear  their  sheep  in  early  spring,  and  again  in  the  autunuii 
and  it  seems  to  pay  them  to  do  so.  A  ride  of  three  miles, 
after  we  got  clear  of  the  sheep  and  the  dust,  over  a  good 
trail,  brought  us  to  a  small  log-hut,  occupied  by  Mr  Smith, 
a  man  employed  by  Mr  Perry  to  cut  trails  in  the  forest  in 
the  direction  of  the  groups  of  big  trees  (for  they  are  generally 
found  in  little  groups),  that  they  might  be  accessible  to 
visitors.  Mr  Smith,  as  he  was  so  introduced  to  me,  is  by 
trade  a  hunter,  a  tall  bony  American  pioneer.  He  told  me 
he  was  a  month  or  two  at  a  time  frequently  in  this  forest 
without  seeing  a  human  being,  his  only  companion  a  dog. 
Guided  by  Mr  Smith,  we  started  to  look  at  some  of  the  big 
trees,  of  which  they  say  there  are  some  1400  in  the  forest 
In  the  .Mariposa  grove  there  are  about  600 ;  in  the  Calaveras, 
only  ninety-three.  This  forest  may  be  truly  called  primeval, 
the  hand  of  man  has  done  nothing  here  yet  beyond  *^  biasing," 
as  they  call  it  here,  that  is,  chipping  off  a  little  bark  from 
the  trees  in  the  line  of  trail  proposed  to  be  made,  to  guide 
the  trail-maker  in  his  work.  Not  a  single  tree  has  been  cot 
down,  and,  notwithstanding,  in  the  whole  forest  the  ground 
is  everywhere  cumbered  by  trees  of  monstrous  growth  lying 
about  The  sequoia  is  not  the  only  big  tree  here  ;  the  sugars 
pine  and  the  pitch-pine,  with  many  others,  attain  to  great 
dimensions,  the  former  in  thousands  averaging  from  five  to 
seven  feet  in  diameter,  and  from  150  to  200  feet  in  height, 
and  many  attain  a  diameter  of  from  ten  to  twelve  feet 
Thousands  of  these  trees,  and  of  the  sequoia  also,  are  lying 
about  in  all  directions,  and  in  every  stage  of  decay,  the  i 
result  of  the  work  of  ages ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
layer  upon  layer  of  these  monstrous  trees  lie  buried  beneath 
the  soil,  which  has  been  accumulating  silently  in  this  forest 
for  perhaps  thousands  of  thousands  of  years.  It  is  not  until 
a  tree  is  down,  stretched  on  the  ground,  that  you  become 
sensible  of  its  dimensions ;   and  it  is  when  you  thus  see 


SOUTH  CALA  VERAS.— MARIPOSA.  19S 

them  that  the  sequoia  se^ms  of  marvellous  dimensions.  We 
climbed  up  and  walked  over  several  of  these  monsters ;  it  was 
always  a  difficult  matter  to  climb  up  these  huge  prostrate 
bodies,  and  on  one  occasion  we  had  to  search  for  some  time  be- 
fore we  found  a  place  that  admitted  of  a  safe  descent  There 
ia  one  fallen  monster  out  of  which  the  heart  was  burnt  some 
three  or  four  years  ago,  and  you  may  now  walk  through  it 
for  about  150  feet,  and  in  a  great  part  of  that  distance  there 
is  room  for  three  horsemen  to  ride  abreast.  Certainly  the 
largest  trees  that  I  saw  are  some  of  those  that  are  upon  the 
ground,  and  which  it  was  impossible  to  measure  with  any 
accuracy.  I  measured  three  of  the  standing  trees  from  the 
ground  somewhere  between  five  and  eight  feet,  and  found 
them  to  be  from  sixty-six  to  sixty-eight  feet  in  circumfer- 
ence; and  one  tree  standing,  but  quite  dead  and  barkless, 
measured  sixty-eight  feet  in  circumference  at  five  feet  from 
the  ground.  The  fallen  trees  had  frequently  a  crop  of  young 
sequoias  growing  upon  them,  the  seed  having  taken  root  in 
the  bark  of  the  big  tree.  Very  few  of  these  big  trees  exist 
that  have  not  suffered  more  or  less  from  fire,  and  in  many  of 
them  the  trunk  is  burnt  out  hollow  to  the  height  of  twelve 
to  twenty  feet,  forming  a  space  for  three  or  four  horsemen 
to  take  shelter,  and  they  are  still  growing  vigorously.  Mr 
Smith  has  turned  one  of  these  burnt-out  trees  into  a  cabin, 
and  a  very  spacious  cabin  it  makes.  A  year  or  two  ago  some 
oxen  died  in  the  forest,  and  the  carcase  of  one  of  them  was 
afterwards  found  in  the  hollow  of  one  of  these  big  trees.  The 
sequoia  carries  its  size  well  up  towards  the  top ;  they  have  most 
of  them — that  is,  the  giants  of  the  forest — apparently  lost  their 
t<qw,  and  have  therefore  a  flattened  appearance,  and  in  this 
way  may  be  distinguished  from  the  surrounding  trees  before 
anything  but  their  top  is  seen.  The  theory  is,  that  after 
losing  their  tops,  the  growth  of  these  trees  has  gone  wholly 
to  swell  the  trunks.  The  Mariposa  grove  of  big  trees  is 
situated  about  sixteen  miles  from  the  lower  hotel  south  of 
it,  in  the  Yosemite  valley,  and  some  five  or  six  miles  from 
Clark's  Banch,  and  at  an  elevation  of  5500  feet  above  sea- 
leveL  It  contains  some  600  trees ;  the  largest  in  the  grove 
is  called  the  Grisly  Giant,  which  I  measured,  and  found  it 
to  be  ninety-nine  feet  in  circumference  close  to  the  ground, 


196  SOUTH  CALA  VERAS. 

and  sixty-fire  feet  (I  leave  out  inches)  at  eleven  feet  above 
the  ground.  This  tree  is  moch  injured  by  fire,  and  no 
donbt  somewhat  thereby  decreased  in  size,  for  which  no 
allowance  has  been  made  in  the  measniement  The  highest 
tree  in  the  Marirosa  grove  is  272  feet ;  the  highest  in  the 
Calaveras  is  325  feet.  The  principal  trees  associated  with 
the  big  trees  in  all  the  groves  I  visited,  and  which,  indeed, 
are  the  only  groves  known,  are  the  pitch-pine  and  the 
sngar-pine,  the  Donglas  spmce  and  the  bastard  cedar ;  this 
latter  very  mnch  resembles  the  big  tree  in  its  bark  and  gen- 
eral appearance.  I  was  told  by  Mr  Smith  that  he  thought 
the  average  thickness  of  the  bark  on  the  sequoia  was  aboat 
six  inches,  but  I  have  seen  a  piece  from  a  tree  in  the  upper 
Mariposa  grove  twenty-four  inches  in  thickness.  There  is 
an  absence  in  all  the  groves  of  a  regular  and  gradually 
increasiog  size  in  the  big  trees.  There  are  the  big  trees, 
perhaps  of  fri-m  5w  to  S<XiC»  years*  growth ;  and  there  are 
the  young  trees,  cf  from  one  to  ten  years''  growth ;  but  I  saw 
very  few  even  of  the  latter,  that  is,  of  about  ten  years'  growth. 
How  is  this  r  Why,  I  should  say,  because  the  periodical 
fires  that  have  taken  place  in  these  forests — ^for  the  signs  of 
them  in  the  ravages  they  have  made  are  patent  everywhere — 
must  have  de^trcved  them.  Then  how  is  it  that  the  existinc^ 
huge  ScquK^ia  pc-jKU"^  has  been  permitted  to  attain  its 
enormous  dimensions?  Whv  were  thev  not  burnt  whilst 
young  in  their  growth  ?  Could  it  have  been  that  man  did 
not  exist  in  these  forests  in  the  earlier  days  of  the  big  trees? 
that  then?  was  no  human  being  to  light  a  fire  there?  Or 
was  it  that  the  ground  was  unincumbered  with  fuel,  that  ib, 
with  brushwood  and  dead  trees,  and  consequently  no  exten* 
sive  fire  cculd  at  that  time  happen  ?  Now  the  whole  forests 
are  covered  with  wholly-burnt,  half-burnt,  or  merely  scorched 
logs,  and  with  such  materials  for  feeding  fires  it  seezns 
almost  impossible  that  many,  if  any.  of  the  young  trees  now 
growing  can  svx^ner  or  later  escape  destruction.  There  is 
hardlv  a  bi<r  tree  in  these  forests  that  is  not  more  or  less 
injured  by  fire. 

The  rinirs  of  annual  crcrvrth  of  the  biir  tree  at  the  CSalave- 
ras,  over  which  a  room  has  K>en  built,  counted  by  Professor 
Whitney  where  the  tree  was  cut  in  two  about  forty  feet  from 


CALA  VERAS— GEYSERS. 


197 


the  grbund  as  the  tree  originally  stood,  showed  it  to  be 
1255  years  old.  Measuring  at  the  same  time  the  width  of 
each  set  of  a  hundred  rings,  beginning  at  the  exterior,  the 
result  was  as  follows  : — 


First  hundredf 

Second 

Third 

Fourth 

Fifth 

Sixth 

Seventh 

Eighth 


3*0  inches. 

37 

41 

3-9 

4-1 

41 

4-6 

6-6 


n 

>» 


n 
n 


Ninth  hundred, 

Tenth 

Eleventh 

Twelfth 

55  years, 

1255  years. 


7*3  inches. 

7*9 
101 
13-0 

9*4 


>> 


80*0 


» 


n 


The  Calaveras  grove  of  big  trees  is  4759  feet  above  sea- 
level,  and  the  south  grove  about  400  feet  higher.  The 
Mariposa  grove,  5500  feet 

On  the  30th  July  I  returned  to  San  Francisco,  having 
been  absent  in  the  Yosemite  valley  and  among  the  big  trees 
for  eleven  days. 

August  AtL — I  visited  the  Califomian  geysers.  To  get 
there,  we  took  a  boat  to  Vallejo,  twenty-five  miles ;  thence 
we  went  on  the  Napa  Valley  Railroad  for  Calistoga  forty- 
four  miles,  and  there  we  slept.  In  the  morning  we  took 
Fosses  stage,  and  proceeded  to  the  geysers,  twenty-eight 
miles.  Vallejo  is  situated  in  the  bay  of  San  Francisco. 
The  United  States  Navy  Yard  is  there.  From  thence  to 
Calistoga  the  line  runs  through  the  Napa  valley,  highly 
cultivated  and  rich  soil,  the  ride  very  pretty ;  some  moder- 
ately high  hills,  not  very  far  apart,  enclosing  the  valley,  as 
it  were,  in  its  full  extent.  The  town,  through  which  the  line 
runs,  is  a  remarkably  pretty  place,  composed  mostly  of  houses 
with  large  gardens  or  vineyards  attached.  Many  of  the 
wealthy  Californians,  I  am  told,  are  making  this  valley  their 
conntry  residence.  The  crops  of  grain  were  all  gathered  in 
when  we  passed  through,  and  in  more  than  one  field  we  saw 
the  threshing-machine  at  work,  and  the  grain  sacked  up  in 
others  ready  for  removal  to  market.  The  valley  is  well 
studded  with  oak-trees  and  fruit-trees  also.  The  river  Napa 
runs  through  it  On  starting  from  Calistoga,  the  drive  for 
eleven  miles  is  through  a  continuation  of  the  Napa  valley. 
This  first  stage  towards  the  geysers  we  were  driven  by  Mr 
Fo8s^  with  six  horses  attached  to  a  char-d-banc^  holding  nine 


198  GEYSERS. 

persons  including  the  driver ;  the  rest  of  the  route  we  pro- 
ceeded in  a  four-horse  char-d-banc^  driven  by  one  of  Fobb's 
coachmen^  the  road  leading  over  hill  and  dale  until  we  arrived 
at  a  height  of  3200  feet  above  sea-level ,  and  2700  feet  above 
Calistoga ;  we  then  began  to  descend  until  we  arrived  at  the 
hotel  close  to  the  geysers,  1800  feet  above  sea-level.  The 
first  part  of  the  road  after  leaving  Calistoga  was  well  studded 
with  oak,  having  the  appearance  in  many  places  of  English 
park  scenery.  As  we  got  higher,  we  found  ourselves  among 
pines,  firs,  maple,  and  for  a  great  many  miles  the  land  on 
both  sides  was  covered  with  a  good  growth  of  wild  oats.  We 
occasionally  met  with  some  pretty  points  in  the  hilly  scenery ; 
it  can  hardly  be  called  mountainous.  The  ground,  however, 
almost  everywhere  had  a  scorched  or  dried-up  appearance. 

Immediately  on  our  arrival  at  the  hotel  we  started  to  visit 
the  geysers,  which  inflicted  a  walk  under  a  scorching  sun  of 
about  two  miles.  These  geysers  are  situated  in  a  cafion 
which  gradually  rises  in  all  its  length  of  about  a  mile  firom 
the  hotel.  The  hot  mineral  water  or  steam  jets,  strongly 
impregnated,  some  with  sulphate  of  iron,  some  with  Epsom 
salts,  alum,  magnesia,  sulphur,  and,  they  say,  cinnabar, 
issue  forth  on  both  sides  of  the  canon,  occasionally  with 
great  violence,  bubbling  and  boiling  in  all  directions,  and 
sometimes  attaining  to  a  heat,  we  were  told,  of  215^  The 
hissing  and  the  subterranean  noises  indicated  a  source  of 
great  heat  close  at  hand.  Over  one  jet  of  steam  a  whistle 
had  been  established,  and  the  whistling  was  heard  for  a  mile 
or  two  in  every  direction.  Less  than  an  hour  brought  lu 
back  to  the  hotel,  where  we  lunched,  and,  besides  a  dollar  for 
the  lunch,  we  were  each  (there  were  seven  of  us)  charged  a 
dollar  for  our  one  guide — a  monstrous  extortion.  A  four 
hours'  drive  brought  us  back  to  Calistoga,  where  we  slept, 
and  this  morning  returned  to  San  Francisco. 

8M. — On  our  return  from  the  geysers  we  started  off  to  pay 
a  visit  to  the  quicksilver  mine  of  New  Almaden^  situated 
sixty-five  miles  south  of  San  Francisco,  near  the  head  of  the 
valley  of  San  Jos6,  on  an  eastern  spur  of  the  coast  range  of 
mountains^  and  at  the  highest  point  1700  feet  above  sea-leveL 
San  Jos6,  one  of  the  old  Spanish  missions,  is  now  a  flourish- 
ing town.     It  contains,  they  say,  10,000  inhabitants.    The 


ALMA  DEN  MINES.  1 99 

qnicksilYer  mine  is  the  only  ore  of  consequence  in  the  neigh- 
bonrhoody  so  the  town  depends  pretty  much,  almost  indeed 
wholly,  for  support  upon  the  rich  agricultural  surroundings 
of  the  valley  in  which  it  is  situated.  Corn  and  fruit  are 
grown  extensively ;  the  vine  flourishes  and  is  largely  culti- 
vated, and  brandy  and  wine  are  both  made  here.  The  streets 
are  laid  out  at  right  angles ;  they  are  wide  and  paved,  and 
kept  in  very  fair  condition.  Handsome  and  well-stocked 
shops  are  met  with  in  abundance.  Very  few  of  the  old  adobe 
houses  remain.  It  is  said  the  original  owners  and  inhabi- 
tants of  San  Jos£  and  the  adjoining  town  of  Santa  Clara  were, 
in  Bome  instances,  summarily  dispossessed  of  their  holdings 
by  the  go-ahead  innovating  people  who  rushed  like  a  flood 
into  this  country  in  1849. 

On  the  6th  we  started  from  the  hotel  at  San  Jos6  for  the 
mine  in  an  open  vehicle  drawn  by  two  horses,  for  which  we 
paid  twelve  dollars,  distant  fourteen  miles.  The  road  is  good 
(for  California)  all  the  way,  and  apparently  quite  level  for 
about  eleven  miles,  to  the  village  of  New  Almaden,  where 
the  reducing  furnaces  are  situated.  From  the  village  to  the 
'mine  the  distance  is  three  miles,  all  uphill.  As  we  mounted 
we  saw  the  truck-loads  of  mineral  coming  down  the  precipi- 
tous slope  from  the  mine  to  the  furnaces  on  one  line  of  rail, 
and  the  empty  trucks  ascending  by  another  placed  side  by 
side.  All  aroand  about  the  mine  the  hills  are  studded  with 
pretty  little  cottages  in  which  the  employes  and  miners 
reside.  One  of  the  foremen,  against  whom  we  stumbled  on 
leaving  our  carriage,  at  once  offered  to  show  us  something  of 
the  mine ;  so  after  providing  ourselves  with  candles,  which  we 
carried  in  cleft  sticks,  we  entered  the  mine  through  a  tunnel, 
and  after  several  turnings  came  upon  a  place  at  which  two 
Cornish  miners  were  at  work«  The  vein  of  cinnabar  could  be 
easily  traced  at  this  point  in  its  ramification  through  the 
limestone  rock,  though  at  present  not  very  rich.  The  colout 
is  not  like  some  I  have  seen,  a  bright  vermilion,  but  of  a 
brickdusty  colour,  and  might  very  well  be  mistaken  for  iron 
ore.  I  was  told  that  the  rock  extracted  yields  at  present 
only  five  per  cent,  of  ore,  and  the  ore  about  three  to  five  per 
cent,  of  quicksilver ;  the  statements  I  received  on  this  point 


200  ALMADEN  MINES. 

were  somewhat  contradictory.     Most  of  the  work  done  at  the 
mine  is  paid  for  by  the  piece ;  the  miners  get  five  dollars  the 
cargo  of  300  lbs.  of  clean  ore,  and  earn  three  dollars  a  day. 
The  Mexicans  who  break  np  the  stone  and  separate  the  ore 
from  it  are  also  paid  by  piecework.     I  was  told  there  are 
now  400  men  employed,  and  that  the  mine  does  not  pay  ex- 
penses ;  the  deepest  workings  are  400  feet    There  are  thir- 
teen reducing  furnaces,  but  only  two  or  three  working  at 
present.     The  process  of  extracting  the  quicksilver  from  the 
ore  is  very  simple.     The  earthy  part  of  the  ore  is  made  into 
adobes  or  bricks,  and  dried  in  the  sun ;  in  charging  the  fur- 
nace, a  layer  of  these  bricks  is  placed  on  edge  at  the  bottom 
of  the  furnace,  then  a  thick  layer  of  ore  as  it  comes  down 
from  the  mine  is  put  into  the  furnace,  followed  by  another 
layer  of  adobes,  and  so  on  until  the  furnace  is  quite  full.  The 
adobes  are  formed  of  the  poorest  part  of  the  ore,  containing 
one  or  two  per  cent  of  quicksilver,  but  they  are  useful  in 
creating  a  draught  through  the  whole  mass  of  ore.  The  furnaces 
or  ore-chambers  are  of  different  sizes,  holding  from  fifty  to 
one  hundred  tons  each.     When  the  ore-chamber  is  charged, 
the  door  is  securely  fastened  up,  and  a  fire  is  lighted  in  an 
adjoining  furnace,  the  heat  entering  the  ore-chamber  through 
a  perforated  brick  wall  or  partition,  and  thus  permeating  the 
whole  mass  of  ore  and  bringing  it  up  to  a  red  heat,  at  which 
temperature  the  quicksilver  contained  in  the  ore  escapes  in 
the  shape  of  vapour,  and  passing  outwards  to  the  condensing- 
chambers  through  other  perforated  brick  walls,  ultimately  on 
cooling  falls  in  the  shape  of  quicksilver  into  a  trough  which 
extends  the  whole  length  of  the  building,  and  from  thence 
finds  its  way  into  a  large  circular  caldron,  from  which  it  is 
dipped  up  and  put  into  iron  bottles,  holding  each  seventy-five 
lbs.    I  was  told  the  mine  at  present  was  producing  2000 
bottles  of  quicksilver  a  month,  worth  forty-five  dollars  a  bottle, 
and  that  it  ought  to  produce  10,000  bottles  before  the  share- 
holders can  expect  much  of  a  dividend.     There  was  a  time 
when  Baron  Forbes  &  Co.  took  700,000  dollars  gain  yearly 
out  of  this  mine,  and  afterwards  the  company  took,  I  am 
told,  two  million  dollars  in  one  year.     The  ore  may  be  said 
to  be  found  in  pockets  more  than  in  a  continuous  regular 


ALMADEN  MINES—SAN  FRANCISCO.  201 

TeiiL  Two  chimneys  at  the  extremity  of  the  reduciDg  works 
carry  tha  sulphurous  and  arsenical  vapours  far  up  the  hill ; 
they  are  cleaned  once  a  year,  and  sometimes  yield  as  many 
as  forty-five  bottles  of  quicksilver.  The  manager  at  the  re- 
ducing works  threw  a  piece  of  iron  weighing  perhaps  a  pound 
into  the  caldron  containing  quicksilver,  upon  the  surface  of 
which  it  floated  like  a  bit  of  cork  :  it  was  a  practical  way  of 
proving  how  light  was  iron  compared  with  quicksilver.  The 
irrigation,  I  am  told,  in  the  valley  of  San  Jose  is  carried  on 
by  means  of  Artesian  wells,  which  are  very  numerous,  the 
water  coming  up  to,  or  near  to,  the  surface,  and  sometimes 
rising  a  few  feet  higher.  Everywhere  in  California,  and  in- 
deed in  other  parts  of  the  States  also,  windmills  were  used 
for  pumping  water  from  wells,  both  for  house  and  irrigation 
purposes. 

9^^. — We  visited  the  mint,  and  witnessed  the  operation  of 
taming  gold-dust  into  bars,  and  bars  into  twenty-dollar 
pieces.  The  admixture  of  alloy  (copper)  in  coined  money  is 
one-tenth  part  of  the  whole.  The  stamping-machine  turned 
out  eighty  pieces  a  minute — it  was  worked  by  a  woman. 
Last  year  the  mint  turned  out  twenty  millions  of  dollars' 
worth  of  coin.  The  present  mint  is  a  very  poky  little 
place,  and  quite  unfit  for  the  purpose  to  which  it  is  put; 
a  large  and  appropriate  granite  building  is,  however,  now  in 
course  of  construction. 

The  officers  of  the  mint  were  most  civil,  and  showed  and 
explained  everything.  In  the  afternoon  we  hired  a  team, 
and  our  host  drove  us  to  the  Cliff  House,  where  the  sea- 
lions,  protected  by  Act  of  Congress,  gambol  freely  and 
securely  over  the  face  of  some  rocks,  situated  in  the  Pacific 
a  few  hundred  yards  from  the  cliff  upon  which  the  Cliff 
House  is  built  I  counted  fifty  of  these  animals  on  one 
rock  at  a  time ;  they  were  howling  loudly,  and  in  constant 
movement,  tumbling  into  the  water  and  again  returning  to 
the  rock,  fighting  or  playing  constantly.  A  few  old  fellows 
were  sound  asleep  on  the  summit  of  one  of  the  highest  rocks. 
They  are  very  large  some  of  theni,  and  reach,  they  say, 
5000  Iba.  in  weight  A  drive  of  three-quarters  of  an  hour, 
over  an  excellent  macadamised  road,  brings  you  to  the  Cliff 


2oa  CLIFF  HOUSE. 

House  from  San  Francisco,  and  after  gazing  at  these  wonder- 
ful seals  for  half  an  hoar,  we  started  along  the  hard  Bsndj 
beach,  and  turned  towards  the  city  by  another  road  which  led 
us  past  the  old  mission  church,  kept  in  good  repair,  and  still 
useful.  This  is  almost  the  only  relic  of  the  former  San  Fran* 
Cisco  now  left. 


CHAPTER  X. 

Stn  nanetMo  to  Sandwich  IiUndi— Honolulu— Haw»ii~EaDaka  women— Pali  pie- 
eipioe — ^Voleanio  ridges — Tare  and  sugar  plantations — No  pot,  no  man—Boving 
miMJonariee — ^Hilo — ^The  Duke  of  Edinburgh — No  nun  allowed  to  be  made- 
One-sided  laws — Coffee  and  silk  abundant — No  more  sandalwood — Qreat 
decrease  in  population,  the  causes— Volcano — Eilauea  Inn,  the  crater,  descrip- 
tion of  Pole's  hair — Mauna  Loa— Singing  birds — Description  of  crater,  eruption 
of  1868 — ^Trees — Captain  Cook— Natives,  their  rapid  decrease— Increase  of 
foreigners,  half-castes,  and  Chinese— Oovemment  monarchical — Taxes— Social 
eril— Causes  of  native  depopulation— Natives  "thoroughly  demoralised" — 
Sad  meture  in  1862,  worse  now— Missionaries  in  g^reat  numbers — Natives  may 
have  oeen  taught  religion,  but  are  not  moral — Missionaries  rich  in  lands,  flocks, 
fcc.— People  in  power  are  Americans— Bevenue  and  expenditure. 

Lkft  Saa  Francisco,  in  the  Ajax^  on  the  11th  of  August,  for 
Honolala.  This  steamer  is  very  slow,  and  seven  knots  is 
about  what  she  is  equal  to,  though  the  captain  says  we  are 
making  nine  and  a  half  knots ;  if  so,  the  extra  two  and  a  half 
knots  most  be  due  to  some  occult  power. 

I^Jl — We  have  made  1132  miles  since  we  left.  Tem- 
peratore,  SS"*  in  cabin ;  weather  fine.  Nothing  either  dead 
or  alive  in  sight 

21«^,  2  A.M. — Entered  the  port  of  Honolulu  after  waiting 
outside  an  hour  for  a  pilot,  so  our  passage  from  San  Fran- 
cisco has  been  nine  days  and  a  half.  A  quieter  passage  we 
could  not  have  had ;  hardly  a  capful  of  wind  the  whole  time ; 
not  a  single  squall  or  a  drop  of  rain.  We  have  experienced 
no  trade-windy  and  the  pilot  tells  me  the  wind  has  been 
southernly  at  and  about  Honolulu  for  a  week.  Meteors 
very  numerous  last  night 

TAth, — I  have  taken  my  passage  by  the  schooner  Kate  Lee^ 
bound  for  Hilo,  in  the  island  of  Hawaii,  and  we  are  now 
waiting  for  a  breeze  in  order  to  make  a  start  All  day  yes- 
terday and  to-day  the  deck  of  the  Kate  Lee  has  been  crowded 
with  Kanaka  women-passengers,  sitting  about  holding  um- 
brellas over  their  heads  waiting  patiently  for  the  schooner 
to  go  to  sea.     Happily  for  them,  these  people  seemed  to  be 


204  HONOLULU. 

blessed  with  any  amount  of  patience.     Seeing  there  was  do 
prospect  of  getting  away,  I  hired  a  boggy,  droye  up  the 
valley,  and  visited  the  Pali,  the  terminns  of  the  valley  that 
mns  np  for  about  five  miles  from  the  town  and  port  of 
Honolulu.     Everybody  is  expected  to  visit  the  Pali,  which  u 
nothing  more  nor  less  than  a  precipice,  the  ascent  to  which, 
600  feet,  is  quite  gradual,  and  from  the  summit  you  have  a 
view  of  the  sea  on  the  northern  side  of  the  island,  and  over 
and  up  into  a  valley  of  some  extent     The  valley  running  up 
from  Honolulu  between  two  volcanic  ridges  of  hills  ends  at 
the  Pali,  and  is  there  very  narrow.     Every  part  about  yoa 
is  rugged  and  volcanic,  and  the  view  over  the  precipice — from 
which  runs  a  steep  road  available  for  horses  into  the  vallej 
beneath — and  over  the  ocean,  is  pretty  enough.     Still  it  is 
not  of  that  imposing  character  visitors  are  led  to  expect 
before  they  have  seen  it.     However,  it  is  considered  the  thing 
to  be  seen  by  persons  who  come  to  Honolulu,  therefore  I 
Iiired  a  buggy,  and,  much  against  the  grain,  paid  five  dollan 
for  it,  with  permission  to  drive  myself  five  miles  to  the  Pall 
For  about  one-half  of  the  drive  the  road  is  lined  with  pretty 
little  wooden  cottages,  each  with  its  garden  and  small  orna- 
mental plantation,  inhabited   for   the    most  part  by  mer- 
chants and  missionaries,  and  taro  patches  belonging  to  the 
natives,  and  there  is  also  one  sugar  plantation,  though  it  is 
but  a  small  affair,  belonging  to  a  Mr  Wood.     The  King'a 
mausoleum  and  the  Protestant  and  Catholic  burial-grounds 
are  also  passed  on  the  way  to  the  Pali.     The  last  half  of  the 
road  is  still  waiting  for  the  hands  of  man  to  do  something  to 
it ;  there  is  some  scant  herbage  on  both  sides,  and  a  row  of 
hibiscus-trees,  with  a  large  yellow  flower,  for  a  quarter  of  a 
mile  on  one  side ;  and  for  a  mile  and  a  half  on  both  sides 
a  dense  growth  of  trees  resembling  the  mangrove — a  tree, 
however,  which  I  have  never  seen  unless  on  the  banks  of 
rivers.     There  are  also  met  with  a  few  cocoa-nut  pahns. 
The  drive  out  and  back  occupied  three  hours,  and  by  the 
time  I  had  returned  to  Honolulu  the  trade-wind,  which  had 
been  dormant  for  more  than  a  week,  commenced  to  blow,  and 
at  4  P.M.  the  Kate  Lee  cast  off  her  fasts,  set  sail,  and  was 
soon  clear  of  Honolulu  on  her  way  to  Hilo.    We  have  been 
now  twenty-four  hours  at  sea,  and  are  off  the  east  end  of  the 


HONOL  UL U  TO  HILO.  205 

island  of  Manii,  nearly  half  way  to  Hilo.  The  KaJte  Lee  is 
ahont  eighty  tons  burden,  and  is  sailed  with  a  crew  of  eight 
men  and  officers,  the  sailors  of  course  being  all  natives.  She 
has  a  full  cargo  on  board,  and  a  deck-load  besides  of  salmon 
and  Hawaian  men,  women,  and  children.  We  came  out  of 
Honolulu  in  company  with  the  Netty y  bound  for  Mauii,  and 
have  beaten  her  about  five  miles  dead  to  windward  in  the 
twenty-four  hours,  though  the  Netty  is  considered  the  fastest 
little  craft  of  all  the  Hawaian  fleet  of  coasting  schooners. 
We  are  now  passing  into  the  Hawaian  Channel,  having  come 
through  between  Lanai  and  Mauii ;  the  wind  is  very  light, 
but  most  probably  we  shall  soon  have  a  stiff  trade  again. 
Our  deck  passengers  seem  all  very  happy,  and  are  well 
supplied  with  their  favourite  food,  made  from  the  taro-root, 
ground  and  mixed  with  water  to  a  consistency  sufficiently 
stiff  to  admit  of  a  good  mouthful  being  taken  up  by  plung- 
ing one  finger  into  the  calabasli.  They  make  also  what 
they  call  two-finger  poij  not  quite  so  stiff.  It  would  seem 
that  this  pot  is  a  wonderfully  sustaining  food.  The  Ha- 
waian is  satisfied  when  he  can  get  enough  poi;  upon  it, 
and  it  alone,  he  will  work  and  grow  fat ;  without  poiy  he  is 
never  satisfied.  Our  little  cabin  is  crammed  with  passengers. 
Four  Chinamen,  four  white  men — ^two  of  whom,  I  think,  are 
roving  missionaries — and  Mr  F.,  the  owner  of  the  Kate  Lee^ 
who  was  a  fellow-passenger  with  me  in  the  Ajax.  As  we 
passed  Lahaina  in  Mauii,  on  the  27th,  a  boat  brought  off  a 
large  box  of  grapes,  which  were  very  acceptable.  The  box 
of  grapes  proved  a  Pandora's  box  for  me,  for  by  eating  of 
the  contents  without  stint — very  irrationally,  I  admit — I 
made  myself  very  ill.    Arrived  at  Hilo  the  30th  August 

September  4tA. — I  was  hospitably  received  at  Hilo  by  Captain 
Tom  Spencer,  who  has  a  sugar  plantation  here.  He  is  an 
old  American  whaling  captain,  and  was  very  fond  of  talking 
about  the  Duke  of  Edinburgh,  who  had  visited  Hilo  not  long 
before,  and  who  took  up  his  quarters  with  Captain  Spencer. 
Of  the  Duke  the  Captain  never  tired  of  singing  the  praises. 
Captain  Spencer's  sugar  plantation  consists  of  about  400 
acres  under  cane,  which  produces  about  300  tons  of  sugar. 
Ifearly  the  whole  of  the  molasses  goes  to  waste,  a  stringent 
law  prohibiting  the  distillation  of  rum  from  it,  in  drder  to 


2o6  SUGAR  PLANTATIONS— PRODUCE  GENERALLY. 

remoTe  temptation  to  get  drunk  from  the  native  Hawaiana. 
The  sugar-planter  in  the  Hawaian  Islands  works  conseqaently 
at  a  great  disadvantage  with  his  sugar-producing  competitor 
whom  he  meets  in  the  markets  of  San  Francisco  and  in 
Australia.  The  Legislature  too,  by  its  one-sided  laws,  inter- 
feres seriously  in  another  way  with  the  sugar-planter :  they 
have  not  made  a  law  which  prevents  the  introduction  of 
Chinese,  but  they  discourage  their  coming;  they  call  it 
slavery  to  bring  them  here  under  engagements  to  serve  for 
three  to  five  years,  and  they  set  their  faces  against  it  accord- 
ingly. They  also  set  their  faces  against  the  enforcement  of 
contracts  made  with  the  natives,  which  range  from  three 
weeks  to  three  years,  by  imprisonment  or  otherwise ;  and  as 
it  is  impossible  to  work  a  sugar  plantation  with  men  hired 
&om  week  to  week,  or  otherwise  than  by  steady  and  regular 
labour,  the  planter  in  these  islands  finds  himself  considerably 
hampered  in  his  endeavours  to  make  a  profitable  btisiness 
out  of  sugar-planting,  which  may  be  fairly  considered  the 
staple  industry  of  the  islands.  Coffee  and  the  silkworm 
have  been  both  tried,  and  have  been  almost  entirely  aban- 
doned. The  gathering  and  shipping  to  California  of  an 
article  called  pulu^  the  silky  covering  of  the  tree-fern,  used 
for  6tu£Sng  beds,  was  a  brisk  business  for  a  few  yeani, 
and  used  to  command  from  twenty  to  twenty-five  cents  a 
pound.  Many  went  into  so  profitable  a  business,  and  glutted 
the  market.  It  would  seem  the  article  is  not  used  much 
now,  for  the  price  has  dropped  to  five  cents,  and  nominal  even 
at  that  The  sandalwood  trade  has  come  to  an  end  long 
ago.  There  is  a  little  rice  produced.  The  taro  of  course  ii 
still  cultivated  extensively,  but  not  as  it  used  to  be  when  the 
islands  contained  400,000  inhabitants,  but  still  extensively 
when  compared  with  the  diminished  population  of  50,000, 
and  still  diminishing,  they  say,  at  the  rate  of  1000  to  1300 
annually,  the  deaths  exceeding  the  births  by  that  number ; 
so  we  may  infer  from  these  figures  that  within  sixty  years 
the  whole  native  population  will  have  passed  away.  The 
causes  of  the  rapidly  dying  out  of  these  Hawaians,  it  is  said, 
are — ^first,  the  uncontrolled  sexual  intercourse  that  exists 
among  them ;  next,  the  habit  of  the  women  of  constantly 
riding   on  horseback  astraddle ;   and  lastly,   the  dislike  ^ 


DECREASE  IN  THE  NATIVE  POPULATION.     207 

the  native  women  to  have  children,  which  induces  them  to 
have  recourse  to  every  means  in  their  power  to  prevent  it. 

To  the  other  productions  of  these  islands  already  enumer- 
ated we  may  add  ox  and  cow  hides  and  goat-skins.  The 
pulu  fern  is  found  only  on  the  island  of  Hawaii.  The  ava^ 
the  root  of  which  produces  a  spirit,  grows  here ;  and  the 
ti  grows  also  on  this  island  (Hawaii)  in  great  abundance,  the 
root  containing  a  large  percentage  of  saccharine  matter ;  and 
a  good  spirit  might  be  made  from  it,  in  quantity  sufficient 
to  pay  well,  but  the  Legislature  has  prohibited  the  distilling 
of  it 

This  cattle-and-milk  ranch,  at  which  I  arrived  yesterday 
from  the  Volcano  House,  sixteen  miles,  belougs  to  Mr 
Charles  Richardson.  There  are  some  4000  head  of  horned 
cattle  upon  it,  and  Mr  Hichardson  milks  forty  cows  once  a 
day  only,  and  makes  ten  to  fifteen  pounds  of  butter  daily,  for 
which,  as  well  as  his  fat  cattle,  he  finds  a  market  at  Hilo. 
The  skim-milk  goes  to  feed  pigs. 

12^fL — The  Volcano  House  stands  on  the  edge  of  the 
crater  of  Kilauea,  and  600  feet  above  the  bottom  of  it  The 
distance  from  Hilo  is  twenty-nine  miles.  I  came  up  to  it 
with  Mr  Richardson,  whom  I  met  at  Captain  Spencer's.  I 
had  been  ill  for  four  days,  after  eating  immoderately  of  the 
grapes  from  Mauii,  and  was  unfit  to  travel ;  so  by  the  time  I 
had  ridden  eight  or  nine  miles  I  felt  very  tired,  and  suffered 
from  a  burning  thirst,  with  no  water  to  be  had  until  we  had 
advanced  five  miles  farther  on  our  way.  I  felt  very  much 
knocked  up  by  the  time  I  had  accomplished  these  five  miles ; 
bat  now  we  found  good  drinkable  rain-water  in  abundance  at 
a  native  hut,  and  I  pitched  into  it  without  stint.  A  mile 
and  a  half  farther  on  we  reached  the  half-way  house,  and 
there  we  made  a  halt  of  an  hour,  and  had  a  cup  of  tea.  I 
now  felt  very  much  better,  and  got  over  the  remaining  half 
of  the  journey  without  difficulty.  The  sun  was  intensely  hot 
during  the  first  half  of  the  journey,  and  we  had  more  or  less 
rain  during  the  whole  of  the  last  half. 

The  Volcano  House  stands  just  4000  feet  above  the  sea, 
and  we  found  it  cold  enough  there,  wet  as  we  were,  to  enjoy 
and  properly  appreciate  a  good  fire  made  of  wood  piled  up  on 
a  stonning  pair  of  dog-irons.    This  inn  is  a  great  blessing 


2o8  KILAUEA. 

for  trayellers  and  visitors  to  the  volcano.  It  is  owned  by  a 
native,  and  managed  by  a  Chinaman,  and  very  creditably 
supplied  with  eatables  and  some  drinkables,  also  with  clean 
comfortable  beds.  The  charge  is  high,  however — five  dollars 
a  day.  As  I  have  said  before,  it  is  situated  on  the  northern 
bank  of  the  crater,  and  000  feet  above  it,  of  which  you  have 
a  perfect  view  from  the  paling  in  front  The  inn  is 'almost, 
if  not  quite,  in  the  midst  of  jets  of  steam,  issuing  from 
cracks  in  the  earth  all  round  about  it.  Within  a  hundred 
yards  of  it  stands  a  mound  of  sulphur,  150  yards  long,  from 
every  part  of  which  jets  of  steam  are  issuing,  and  close  to  it 
sulphur-baths  have  been  established — good,  they  say,  for  the 
cure  of  rheumatic  affections ;  and  under  the  same  roof  is  a 
hot  spring  of  plain  water,  in  which  my  thermometer  stood 
at  180°.  Mixed  up  with  sulphur  in  this  mound  or  hill  are 
alum,  ochre,  and  other  matters.  The  woodwork  of  the  Vol- 
cano House  is  coloured  with  this  ochre,  and,  mixed  with  oil, 
it  makes  a  good  substitute  for  paint.  On  arriving  at  the 
Volcano  House  from  Hilo,  a  view  of  the  volcano  of  Kilanea 
bursts  upon  you  without  any  warning.  The  old  crater  lies 
right  before  you,  600  feet  below  where  you  stand.  It  is  per- 
haps five  miles  in  circumference,  and  to  the  naked  eye  looks 
like  a  lake  of  quiet  liquid  tisphalt.  On  closer  acquaintance, 
however,  you  find  that  it  is  an  irregular  surface  of  hardened 
lava,  full  of  cracks,  through  many  of  which  liquid  lava  is 
quietly  oozing  out  on  the  surface,  slowly  filling  up  the 
depressions  it  meets  with.  Beyond  this  old  crater  (I  call  it 
old,  though  it  was  the  active  crater  only  a  few  years  ago), 
which  may  be  a  mile  and  a  half  to  two  miles  wide,  the  eye 
discovers  a  higher  bed,  whence  smoke,  fire,  and  steam  issue 
from  a  dozen  or  more  mouths.  This  is  the  present  crater  or 
reservoir  of  the  liquid  lava  of  the  volcano.  To  reach  it  you 
have  to  ascend,  after  crossing  the  old  crater,  up  a  sloping 
bed  of  lava  for  about  a  hundred  feet,  full  of  fissures.  This 
new  crater-site  is  more  or  less  at  the  same  height  as  the 
broad  sloping  bed  of  lava  which  encircles  on  three  sides  the 
old  crater,  a  black  ledge,  one  of  the  most  striking  features  of 
the  crater.  It  was  formed  after  an  eruption  by  the  central 
mass  of  lava  slowly  subsiding,  leaving  behind,  round  the 
edges,  a  considerable  portion,  which,  on  coolings  retained  its 


"^^  KILAUEA.  209 

position.  The  old  and  the  new  craters  are  partly  surrounded 
by  a  wall  of  basalt^  some  600  feet  in  height,  enclosing  an  area 
of  about  nine  niUes.  At  night  this  old  crater  is  dotted  all  over 
by  ever-varying  fires,  as  seen  from  the  Volcano  House,  pro- 
duced by  liquid  lava  issuing  slowly  from  the  fissures  in  the 
bed,  and  gradually  filling  up  depressions  on  the  surface. 

The  morning  after  my  arrival  I  descended  with  a  guide 
from  the  hotel  down  the  precipice  in  front,  and  proceeded 
to  cross  over  the  old  crater.  On  the  way  we  dipped  up  some 
liquid  lava  as  it  oozed  from  the  cracks  in  the  bed,  embedding 
some  coina  in  it.  The  liquid  lava,  on  being  dipped  up,  and 
thus  separated  from  the  flowing  mass,  hardened  almost  in- 
stantaneously, but  took  some  time  to  cool.  Leaving  our  coins 
to  oool,  and  to  be  picked  up  on  our  return,  we  passed  on  over 
some  very  hot  lava,  and  ascended  to  the  terrace  (if  it  may  be 
so  called)  upon  which  the  present  blow-holes  or  vent-holes  are 
in  fall  operation.  Most  of  these  fiery  furnaces,  or  rather  these 
vent-holes,  have  small  cones  partly  surrounding  them,  gen- 
erally of  the  most  grotesque  shapes,  formed,  no  doubt,  by 
spntterings  from  the  boiling  lava  beneath.  Some  of  these 
vent-holes  were  not  more  that  six  or  eight  feet  in  diameter, 
whilst  the  surface  opening  of  one  of  these  boiling  caldrons 
was  not  less  than  twenty-five  feet  in  diameter.  As  well  as 
I  could  judge,  in  none  of  these  pits,  which  cover  many  acres 
of  ground,  was  the  boiling  and  surging  mass  of  molten  lava 
nearer  to  the  surface  than  ten  or  fifteen  feet.  The  noise  was 
great  in  some  of  these  pits,  whilst  in  others  the  boiling 
operation  proceeded  very  quietly.  We  occasionally  got  a 
whiff  of  diabolical  exhalation,  which  was  very  stifling,  though, 
for  the  most  part,  we  took  especial  care  to  keep  to  windward 
of  the  vent-holes.  I  stood  some  time  gazing  into  these 
wonderful  caldrons,  and  employed  in  picking  up  some  of 
Pele*8  hair,  of  which  I  found  only  a  small  quantity.  This 
hair  is  an  emanation  from  the  lava  pits,  thrown  up  in  the 
shape  of  light  foam,  from  which  it  separates,  and  falls  into 
the  surrounding  crevices,  somewhat  in  the  shape  of  spun 
glass. 

The  Volcano  House  stands  about  4000  feet  above  the  sea, 
the  old  crater  3400,  and  the  present  terrace,  on  which  are  the 
vent-holes,  about  100  feet  higher.     During  the  great  earth- 


210  ASCENT  OF  MA  UNA  LOA. 

quake,  and  the  eruption  which  accompanied  it,  the  old  crater, 
which  was  then  of  a  conical  shape  in  the  centre,  caved  io, 
and  the  whole  affair  sank  down  considerably ;  whilst  the  great 
south  lake^  1500  feet  long  and  1000  feet  broad,  which  was  at 
a  somewhat  lower  level  than  the  old  crater,  burst  through  a 
weak  spot  in  the  side  of  the  mountain,  and  emptied  itself  of 
itd  contents,  caving  in  and  filling  up  from  the  surface  at  the 
same  time.  The  present  pits  are  now  gradually  filling  with 
lava,  and  when  the  mass  of  lava  becomes  too  weighty  for  the 
strength  of  the  walls  that  enclose  it,  no  doubt  another  fissure 
in  the  side  of  the  mountain  will  be  made,  and  another  lava  flow 
will  be  the  result,  carrying  perhaps  death  and  destruction  in 
its  course.  I  left  the  hotel  at  9  a.m.,  and  returned  at  2,  an 
affair  of  five  hours.  On  the  7th,  at  Mr  Richardson's,  felt  a 
sharp  shock  of  earthquake. 

On  the  5th  I  started  with  a  Kanaka  as  guide  for  the 
summit  of  Mauna  Loa.  Mr  Bicliardson  accompanied  me  as 
far  as  his  ranch,  kept  by  an  Englishman  named  Ellis  (a 
native  of  Plymouth),  where  we  arrived  at  10  a,m.  EUii 
lives  at  this  ranch  with  his  wife,  a  native,  and  has  one  pretty 
little  child,  a  girl.  Ellis  had  never  heard  a  word  about  the 
war  in  Europe  until  he  saw  us  this  morning ;  such  was  the 
blessed  state  of  ignorance  in  which  he  was  living.  After 
drinking  a  bowl  of  new  milk,  I  took  my  departure  at  10.30 
A.M.,  with  the  guide  leading  a  pack-mule  laden  with  water 
and  eatables  to  last  for  the  three  days  we  calculated  we  might 
be  absent  from  Papapala ;  we  also  had  a  fair  amount  of  wi^ 
to  protect  us  from  the  cold  and  rain.  At  1.15  we  reached 
our  camping-ground  for  the  night,  and  I  am  now  watching 
the  Kanaka  busy  making  a  cup  of  coffee,  with  which  to  wash 
down  the  bread  and  beef  I  feasted  on  an  hour  and  a  half 
ago,  and  the  poi  with  which  the  Kanaka  himself  blew  out 
liis  own  hide  pretty  tightly.  The  camping-ground  I  find  to 
be  7050  feet  above  sea-level ;  Ellis's  Ranch  is  3800.  We  are 
encamped  just  on  the  outer  edge  of  the  wood,  beyond  which, 
towards  the  summit  of  Mauna  Loa,  there  seems  to  be  little 
else  than  the  bare  lava.  The  okea  and  the  kaa  trees  are 
growing  around  us,  and  a  good  deal  of  long  tufted  grass. 
In  coming  up,  we  passed  over  great  quantities  of  nice  wild 
strawberries  now  ripe.    A  few  singing  birds  are  here ;  one 


ASCENT  OF  MA  UNA  LOA.  2n 

called  the  mana  has  a  mnsical  note.  The  only  wild  anunals 
in  the  island  are  dogs,  cats,  and  goats,  escaped  from  domesti- 
cation, and  now  have  taken  to  «  wild  life.  By-the-by,  there 
may  be  a  few  wild  hogs  also,  but  not  many ;  the  only  wild 
animals  we  have  yet  seen  are  some  goats.  My  Kanaka  has 
rigged  np  a  shelter  for  sleeping  under,  and  as  the  weather  is 
very  fine,  I  doubt  not  I  shall  sleep  comfortably  enough.  At 
daylight,  or  perhaps  before,  as  there  is  a  good  moon,  we  start 
for  the  sonmxit,  they  tell  me  fifteen  miles  distant 

At  3  A.M.  on  the  6th  it  was  raining  pretty  hard  at  our 
encampment,  and  the  prospect  of  a  pleasure  trip  up  the 
moantain  was  not  at  all  increased  by  it.  I  had  felt  a  slight 
shock  of  earthquake  the  previous  evening  as  I  lay  on  the 
ground ;  and  on  looking  at  my  aneroid,  which  hitherto  had 
not  been  affected  by  the  weather  one-tenth  from  the  time  of 
leaving  San  Francisco,  I  found  it  had  fallen  since  the  even- 
ing before  four-tenths.  At  4  a. m.  I  awoke  my  guide, 
Cavaga,  freshened  np  the  fire,  which  had  got  very  low,  and 
made  some  coffee.  By  daylight  we  had  finished  our  break- 
fasty  80  we  saddled  our  mules ;  and  after  securely  fastening 
the  pack-animal,  which  we  did  not  take  with  us  to  the  top 
of  the  mountain,  we  started  at  5.30  a.m.  for  the  summit 
of  Manna  Loa.  It  was  still  raining,  but  not  much.  Five 
minntes  after  leaving  our  encampment,  the  oheaj  very 
itonted  in  its  growth,  a  free-growing  heath,  and  some  tuxty- 
growing  grass,  formed  almost  the  only  vegetation.  As  we 
moimted  upwards  we  first  lost  the  oheaj  but  not  until,  a 
stately  good-sized  tree  as  it  grows  from  the  sea-level  up  to 
a  height  of  some  6000  feet,  it  had  dwindled  down  to  a  shrub 
of  a  foot  in  height.  The  ohea^  a  hardwood  tree,  seems  to 
be  one  of  the  first  trees  you  meet  with  on  landing  on  the 
island,  and  the  last  you  lose  as  you  proceed  up  the  moun- 
tain. I  have  seen  it  nearly,  if  not  quite,  three  feet  in 
diameter.  The  heath  holds  its  own  on  the  sides  of  the 
mountain  perhaps  up  to  10,000  feet.  You  gradually  lose  it 
as  you  mount,  but  I  think  at  that  height  it  is  completely 
gone ;  there  is  then  nothing  left  to  battle  with  the  lava  but 
a  little  dry  grass;  this  at  11,000  feet  has  also  disappeared, 
and  the  eye  rests  on  nothing  now  but  lava  pure  and  simple. 
And  what  is  this  vast  area  of  lava  like  ?    It  is  really  hard 


2 1 2  ASCENT  OF  MA  UNA  LOA. 

to  say.  I  believe  it  is  nothing  but  the  simple  tmtli  to  state 
that  it  is  like  nothing  in  the  world  bat  itsel£  It  is  some- 
times likened,  so  far  as  the  eye  is  concerned,  to  a  boundless 
extent  of  field-ice  jammed  closely  together,  and  forced  up 
into  a  very  irregular  hummocky  surface.  I  have  seen  such 
as  this,  and  it  is  but  a  poor  representative  of  the  mass  of 
lava  on  Mauna  Loa.  Perhaps  if  one  could  conceive  what 
the  Atlantic  Ocean  would  be — if,  after  a  heavy  gale  of  wind 
from  one  point  of  the  compass  succeeded  instantaneously  by 
a  gale  from  the  opposite  point,  all  motion  on  the  surfiioe 
being  suddenly  suspended — some  idea  might  be  got  of  the 
appearance  of  the  surface  of  Mauna  Loa,  but  a  very  (Sunt 
one  after  all.  There  is  one  feature  in  our  field  of  lava  whidi 
is  entirely  wanting  in  both  our  similes.  It  arises  from  the 
fact  that  the  lava  is  on  an  inclined  plane  to  the  extent  of 
1000  feet  or  more  in  a  mile,  a  black  broken-up  surface  into 
inequalities  up  to  fifty  feet  in  height,  and  into  shapes  so 
diversified  that  every  imaginable  thing  in  the  world  but 
itself  is  there  represented.  It  is  a  complete  conglomerate, 
so  irregular  that  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  how  our  mules 
managed  to  travel  over  it  without  an  accident ;  and  equally 
impossible  is  it  to  conceive  how  my  Kanaka,  the  only  man 
who  had  been  twice  before  up  the  mountain,  ever  found  his 
way  back  from  the  crater  at  the  summit  to  the  camping- 
ground,  often  enveloped,  as  we  were,  in  thick  fog  with 
driving  rain,  and,  so  far  as  I  could  see,  without  a  land- 
mark of  any  sort  to  guide  him,  for  1000  horses  might 
travel  over  that  lava  and  not  leave  a  trace  behind  them. 
As  we  rode  towards  the  summit,  all  was  bright  and  clear 
before  us ;  it  was  only  when  we  looked  behind  that  we 
saw  what  was  in  store  for  us.  The  dense  mass  of  clouds 
behind  and  below  us  had  forced  itself  into  every  gulche 
on  the  side  of  the  mountain,  remaining  compact  and 
unbroken  for  an  hour  or  more,  and  as  the  sun  got 
higher  and  rose  above  the  bank  that  seemed  to  bar  its 
passage,  it  assumed  an  extraordinary  and  beautiful  appear- 
ance. Before  and  above  us  all  looked  bright,  clear,  and 
sunny ;  behind  and  below  we  gazed  upon  a  dense  mass  of 
clouds,  dark  and  threatening,  but  beautiful  to  look  at  not- 
withstanding.    This  state  of  things  did  not  last  long;  the 


ASCENT  OF  MA  UNA  LOA.  213 

san  in  Tain  tried  to  gain  the  ascendancy,  but  the  mass  of 
douda  kept  close  at  his  heels,  and  detached  drifts  of  it  soon 
drove  past  us  before  an  increasing  gale,  accompanied  by 
small  rain.  Now  commenced  a  part  of  the  spectacle  not  the 
least  worth  seeing — the  formation  of  a  series  of  rainbows, 
which  started  from  our  feet,  and  in  a  low  arch  stretched 
across  our  path  almost  within  our  reach,  the  rainbows 
forming  wheneyer  the  sun  gained  a  momentary  ascendancy 
oyer  the  clouds,  and  then  again  as  rapidly  dissipated  by  the 
driving  wind  whenever  the  sun  was  beaten  by  the  mass  of 
moisture  that  followed  it  up  as  fast  as  it  rose.  This  fight 
between  heat  and  moisture,  between  the  sun  and  the  clouds, 
oontinued  until  we  reached  the  vast  plateau,  somewhere 
npon  which  we  had  to  find  the  crater  we  were  in  search  of. 
Oar  course  now  became  more  tortuous,  and  occasionally  it 
seemed  to  me  doubtful  whether  or  no  the  guide  was  quite  sure 
we  were  steering  in  a  right  direction.  At  last  we  came  to  a 
dead  halt,  when  we  discovered,  on  looking  about  us,  at  some 
distance  o£f,  a  heap  of  lava  which  had  been  piled  up  by  this 
very  guide  on  one  of  his  two  previous  trips.  He  at  once  said 
we  are  still  two  miles  from  the  crater ;  and  after  sniffing  the 
air  for  a  moment,  he  went  off  like  a  hound  on  the  scent,  and 
in  half  an  hour  the  black  wall  forming  the  inside  of  the 
farthest  o£f  side  of  the  crater  came  in  sight.  In  a  quarter 
of  an  hour  more  we  were  standing  upon  the  brink  of  it. 

We  had  been  five  and  a  half  hours  from  our  camping- 
ground,  and  had  travelled  over  probably,  with  all  its  twists  and 
tarns,  about  twelve  and  a  half  miles  of  lava.  We  were  now 
standing  on  a  rough  surface  of  tableland,  with  irregularities 
rising  in  some  places  fifty  feet,  but  averaging  perhaps  fifteen 
feet  everywhere  around  us.  So  extensive  is  the  plateau  that 
it  cats  the  horizon  in  every  direction,  and  we  could  see 
nothing  beyond  it  Yes,  we  did  see  the  top  of  Mauna  Kea 
just  above  the  rim  of  the  crater.  My  aneroid,  which  had 
been  affected  by  the  change  in  the  weather  to  the  extent  of 
five-tenths  of  a  degree,  marked  15,000  feet ;  so  after  allowing 
for  the  standing  correction,  and  the  local  correction  for  the 
change  in  the  weather,  it  made  the  edge  of  the  crater,  which 
seemed  to  be  the  highest  point  of  the  mountain^  14,100  feet 
above  sea-leveL 


214  ASCENT  OF  MA  UNA  LOA. 

Commodore  Wilkes  of  the  American  navy  made  the  crater 
to  be  fifteen  miles  in  circumference,  and  700  feet  deep ;  height 
above  the  sea,  13,760  feet.  With  the  exception  of  one 
broken-down  place,  the  walls  of  the  crater  seemed  to  be 
vertical  everywhere.  Jets  of  steam  were  rising  from  six  or  eight 
cracks  in  the  bottom  of  the  crater,  and  smoke  from  one 
aperture,  which  was  hidden  by  a  ridge  or  hill  200  feet  high 
projecting  into  the  crater.  Large  quantities  of  sulphor  were 
visible  in  the  bottom  of  the  crater.  All  round  the  side,  as 
far  as  I  walked,  was  a  great  crack  extending  some  SO  to  100 
yards  from  the  edge,  ready  to  break  away  and  precipitate 
some  thousands  of  tons  of  lava  back  into  the  crater  with  the 
first  smart  shock  of  earthquake.  The  brim  of  the  crater  was 
everywhere  very  rugged  as  we  neared  it,  and  we  met  with 
large  quantities  of  pumice-stone  of  a  greenish-yellow  colour, 
and  some  quite  glassy  in  appearance.  From  a  bottle  hung 
on  a  pole  stuck  in  a  crevice  near  the  edge  of  the  crater  I 
extracted  a  piece  of  paper  on  which  was  written  that  Judge 
Austin  and  two  other  persons  had  visited  the  crater  on  2l6t 
May  last,  having  ridden  the  whole  distance ;  they  were  the 
first  party  who  had  ever  done  so.  I  was  the  second,  and  so 
I  recorded  on  the  same  piece  of  paper  before  replacing  it  in 
the  bottle. 

The  weather  was  bright  and  clear  during  the  two  hours  I 
was  there  taking  luncheon,  picking  up  specimens,  and  gazing 
on  the  scene  of  desolation  spread  out,  and  by  which  I  was 
surrounded  in  every  direction.  At  noon  we  mounted  our 
mules  and  turned  their  heads  homewards.  We  had  hardly 
done  so  when  Madame  Pele,  vexed  perhaps  at  our  short  visit, 
or  at  our  having  dared  to  visit  her  dominions  at  all,  treated 
us  with  a  sharp  shower  of  hail,  which  very  soon  turned  into 
driving  rain,  and  at  times  a  thick  mist,  which  stuck  to  us 
during  the  whole  four  hours  we  spent  in  descending  to  our 
campiug-ground.  In  such  weather  it  seemed  very  undesirable 
to  remain  in  the  open  during  the  night,  so  we  determined  to 
push  on  towards  Ellis's  llauch.  It  took  us  an  hour  to  gather 
up  our  traps  and  load  our  pack-animal,  so  that  it  was  past  five 
before  we  left  the  camping-ground.  Cavaga  proved  himself,  as 
indeed  he  had  done  before,  a  first-rate  guide.  He  traversed  the 
distance,  partly  in  the  dark,  between  the  camping-ground  and 


ASCENT  OF  MAUNA  LOA.  215 

EUis^B  Banch;  without  any  trail  to  guide  him  for  a  great 
portion  of  the  way,  with  the  coufidence  of  a  man  riding  over 
a  turnpike  road,  and  after  two  and  a  half  hours'  ride  he 
announced  that  the  ranch  was  in  sight.  It  was  a  joyful  cry, 
and  a  great  comfort  to  have  the  shelter  of  Ellis's  roof.  This 
good  Samaritan,  assisted  by  his  Hawaian  wife,  busied  himself 
at  once  in  preparing  a  cup  of  tea,  which,  with  the  addition 
of  bread,  and  butter  and  oceans  of  new  milk,  was  soon  set 
before  me,  and  I  did  not  do  it  scant  justice.  After  a  tolerable 
night's  rest,  somewhat  broken  by  hungry  fleas,  I  rose  early, 
refreshed,  partook  of  some  breakfast — milk,  tea,  and  bread 
— and  at  six  started  for  Fapapala,  reaching  that  place  in  an 
hour  and  a  half.  We  had  done  the  journey  so  quickly  that 
Mr  Richardson,  as  he  saw  us  ride  in,  doubted  that  we  had 
been  enabled  to  reach  the  crater.  Those  who  had  been  up 
before  had  invariably  on  their  return  passed  the  night  at 
the  camping-ground,  and  consequently  had  never  reached 
Papapala  before  noon  the  next  day.  To  us  it  was  reserved 
to  shorten  the  route  by  pushing  on  to  Ellis's  Ranch  the  same 
night,  I  passed  Wednesday,  the  7th  September,  under  the 
hospitable  roof  of  Mr  Richardson,  taking  it  easy  after  my 
trip  np  the  mountain.  In  the  afternoon  a  messenger  arrived 
from  Waiohina,  bringing  me  a  note  with  the  information 
that  the  schooner  FrincCy  bound  to  Honolulu,  had  arrived, 
and  was  about  to  proceed  on  to  Kealakeakua  Bay,  and  that 
I  might  catch  her  if  I  pushed  on  at  once ;  so  at  6  a.m.  next 
morning  I  was  in  the  saddle,  and  at  10.30  reached  Waiohina ; 
dined,  and  took  fresh  horses,  and  was  away  at  noon  for  Keala- 
keakua Bay,  distant  sixty  miles.  My  guide  was  mounted  on 
a  mnle,  I  was  on  a  horse. 

The  first  twenty  miles  of  the  road  was  a  raised  causeway 
about  five  feet  wide,  over  a  bed  of  lava,  old  as  the  hills,  with 
Btnnted  trees  growing  on  both  sides.  The  flow  of  lava  from 
liauna  Loa  at  the  great  eruption  of  1868  crossed  this  cause- 
way at  right  angles,  and  destroyed  the  road  for  a  length  of  about 
two  miles,  following  on  and  entering  the  sea  four  miles 
south  of  Waiohina.  This  flow  destroyed  in  its  course  a  con- 
siderable amount  of  good  land ;  among  other  properties,  that 
of  Captain  Brown,  who  with  his  wife  and  family  barely 
escaped  with  their  lives.    This  recent  lava  has  a  white  glossy 


di6  RIDE  FROM  PAPAPALA  TO  KEALAKRAKUA. 

surface,  which  it  will  lose  as  it  grows  older.  The  cansemy  rant 
as  straight  as  an  arrow,  and  we  travelled  over  it  in  all  its  extent 
(barring  the  innovation  on  the  part  of  the  1868  flow  from  Manna 
Loa)  at  a  canter.  Afterwards  the  road  became  more  broken 
and  difficalt,  and  onr  pace  was  consequently  much  slackened. 
A  great  part  of  it  runs  through  a  dense  forest,  growing  up 
amongst  boulders  of  ancient  lava,  the  larger  trees — consist- 
ing principally  of  the  ohea^  the  bread-fruit  tree,  the  candle-nut 
tree,  called  by  the  natives  kukui — ^being  literally  covered  with 
vines,  the  whole  forming  a  thoroughly  tangled  forest,  with 
a  good  sprinkling  of  flowers,  including  a  beautiful  very  large 
blue  convolvulus.  There  were  also  numerous  singing  birds. 
The  first  part  of  the  road  runs  along  on  the  side  of  the 
mountain  from  1000  to  2000  feet  above  the  sea;  the  latter 
part  passes  through  and  across  a  succession  of  gullies,  and 
terminates  by  a  long  descent  into  the  bay  of  Kealakeakoa, 
where  Cook  lost  his  life.  When  about  twenty  miles  from 
the  bay,  we  overtook  the  letter-carrier  and  the  policeman  of 
the  district,  both  going  our  way,  and  soon  afterwards  we 
stopped  at  a  native  house  with  these  two  worthies,  and  laid 
by  for  a  couple  of  hours.  The  policeman  had  seen  the 
Prince  at  4  p.m.  becalmed,  and  he  thought  she  could  not  reach 
Kealakeakua  Bay  before  the  evening  of  the  next  day.  At  Waio- 
hina  I  had  dined  at  noon,  and  now  at  midnight  I  felt  pretty 
hungry,  but  could  get  nothing  to  eat ;  the  good  woman  of 
the  house,  however,  got  up  and  made  a  cup  of  coffee.  At 
2  A.M.  we  were  again  in  the  saddle.  The  night  was  brilliant, 
and  the  moon  at  the  full ;  and  just  as  the  moon  was  setting, 
and  the  morning-star  had  got  well  above  the  horizon,  we 
arrived  on  the  height  overlooking  Kealakeakua  Bay,  and 
there,  coming  round  the  point,  we  saw  the  Prince  making  the 
most  of  the  light  land-breeze  then  blowing.  This  sight  gave 
us  fresh  energy,  and  we  pressed  our  steeds  to  the  utmost  of 
their  power.  It  was  a  neck-and-neck  race  between  the 
schooner  and  ourselves.  At  6.30  we  reached  the  beach,  the 
schooner  not  having  yet  got  into  the  bay ;  so  I  turned  my 
attention  to  procuring  something  to  eat,  and  I  was  directed 
to  a  house  where  two  white  men  lived.  They  turned  out  to 
be  Germans,  both  invalids,  and  there  for  their  health.  One 
of  them  at  once  claimed  acquaintance  with  me.    We  bad  been 


.  KEALAKEAKUA  BAY.  2iy 

fellow-'psBsengers  on  board  the  Ajax  from  San  Francisco. 
He  at  once  placed  before  me  all  be  had  in  the  house,  a  large 
jog  of  fresh  milk  and  a  tin  of  orackers,  to  which  I  was  not 
long  in  doing  ample  justice.  My  meal  finished,  I  chartered 
a  canoe  and  put  off  for  the  schooner,  which  had  brought  up 
close  inshore  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  bay  where  Cook  lost 
his  life,  about  one  mile  distant.  It  was  a  great  relief  to  me 
to  get  on  board  her.  I  had  ridden  eighty-five  miles  on  two 
horses  in  twenty-four  hours,  including  stoppages.  Two  miles 
before  arriving,  my  guide's  mule  quite  gave  in,  and  he  was 
obliged  to  dismount  and  drive  the  animal  before  him.  My 
horse  held  out  better,  but  for  a  considerable  part  of  the  road 
towards  the  last  I  could  get  nothing  out  of  him  beyond  a 
tired  walk,  and  that  only  by  dint  of  applying  the  whip  and 
Bpur.  However,  I  was  now  on  board  the  schooner,  and  for 
a  time,  at  any  rate,  all  my  troubles  had  vanished.  The 
Prince  had  to  remain  here  all  day  taking  in  wood.  I 
employed  myself  on  the  rocks  on  shore,  hunting  for  shells 
and  coral,  to  perpetuate  the  remembrance  of  my  visit,  but 
I  did  not  find  much  of  either. 

On  the  stump  of  a  cocoa-nut  tree,  about  four  feet  long, 
close  to  the  beach,  were  nailed  two  sheets  of  copper,  with 
inscriptions  commemorative  of  Cook's  visit  and  death.  They 
had  been  placed  there  by  the  captains  of  the  Calypso  and 
the  Imogene.  Lying  on  the  ground  were  either  two  or  three 
more  sheets  of  copper  with  inscriptions  on  them,  which  had 
either  been  torn  off  the  stump,  or  had  fallen  off.  The 
natives  have  a  great  fear  of  meddling  with  them,  or  they 
would  have  taken  them  away  long  ago.  The  first  inscription 
is:  "Near  this  spot  +  fell  Captain  James  Cook,  RN.,  the 
renowned  Circumnavigator,  who  discovered  these  Islands, 
A.D.  1778.  Her  Majesty's  Ship  Imogene,  Oct.  17,  1837." 
The  second  is :  "  This  sheet  of  copper  and  cap  put  on  by 
Sparrowhawky  Sept.  13, 1839,  in  order  to  preserve  this  monu- 
ment to  the  memory  of  Cook,  by  Montresor,  Capt.  of  the 
CcUypso^  A  monument  of  stone  and  mortar,  erected  not 
far  from  the  stump  of  the  tree  a  few  years  ago,  under  the 
auspices  of  the  British  Consul  at  Honolulu,  for  the  purpose 
of  perpetuating  the  memory  of  Cook,  has  been  entirely 
destroyed.    An  old  Englishman,  named  John  Yates,  who 


2i8  RETURN  TO  HONOLUtU. 

has  a  cattle  ranch  on  the  top  of  the  hill  that  OTerlpoks  the 
bay,  told  me  that  Cook's  flesh  had  been  burnt  on  the  high 
ground  where  his  ranch  stands. 

The  Prince  remained  fast  to  a  Qovemmeat  buoy  in  this 
bay  until  2  a.m.  of  the  9thy  and  then,  with  a  light  land- 
breeze,  got  under  way^  and  proceeded  on  to  the  ports  of 
Kuamoo,  Keanhou,  and  Kailua,  picking  up  passengers,  some 
cargo,  and  taking  on  board  the  mails.  This  last  service  of 
taking  the  mails  is  obligatory  on  all  vessels  employed  in  the 
coasting  trade  of  these  islands,  without  receiving  any  remu- 
neration. 

We  got  clear  of  our  last  port  at  1  p.m.,  and  soon  after- 
wards it  fell  dead  calm,  and  the  current  was  running  so 
strong  along  shore,  a  considerable  swell  heaving  in  at  the 
same  time,  that  we  had  to  hoist  out  our  boat  and  tow  with 
all  our  strength  far  more  than  an  hour  to  keep  the  good 
schooner  Prince  from  drifting  on  a  projecting  point  of  land 
which  we  passed  very  close  indeed,  carried  along  by  the  cur- 
rent at  the  rate  of  four  miles  an  hour.  Soon  afterwards  we 
took  the  trade-wind  very  strong,  and  ran  across  the  channel 
towards  Mauii,  with  two  reefs  in  our  mainsail.  We  were 
becalmed  a  few  hours  under  the  island  of  Lanai,  and  took  a 
strong  trade  again  about  10  a.m.  on  the  11th,  and  at  5.30  p.m. 
we  arrived  at  Honolulu.  Our  deck  passengers — ^men,  women, 
and  children — among  whom  there  was  one  woman  whom 
they  said  was  a  hundred,  must  have  been  glad  indeed  to 
get  on  shore,  for  they  were  constantly  drenched  with  heavy 
spray.  Tliey  are,  however,  the  Hawaians,  a  most  patient 
and  uncomplaining  people,  and  I  never  heard  from  one 
of  our  passengers  a  single  murmur  or  complaint. 

Had  a  long  interview  yesterday  with  Dr  Judd,  who  accom- 
panied Commodore  Wilkes  in  his  surveying  expedition  in 
1841  to  the  top  of  Mauna  Loa,  and  to  whose  assistance  the 
success  of  that  expedition  was  probably  due.  Dr  Judd  was 
Prime  Minister  here  when  I  visited  Honolulu  in  1844.  He 
remembered  having  received  fifty  bags  huano  from  the  ship 
in  which  I  was  passenger,  and  also  by  an  incautious  applica- 
tion of  that  article  he  had  (he  said)  killed  a  thriving  young 
plant  of  sandalwood  which  he  had  growing  in  his  garden. 
He  recounted  with  wonderful  minutiae  several  disagreeable 


DRJUDD.  219 

incidents  which  happened  during  his  journey  to  Manna  Loa 
with  WilkeSy  bnt  I  did  not  find  his  memory  (he  is  now 
nearly  eighty  years  of  age,  if  not  quite)   at  all  tenacious 
with  regard  to  other  particulars  connected  with  that  trip,  in 
which  he  took  a  very  prominent  part,  when  the  party  remained 
three  weeks  encamped  near  the  crater  of  Moakua-weo-weo. 
They  did  not  know  the  way  up  in  those  days ;  they  went  on 
foot,  and  were  a  week  in  reaching  the  summit  from  Kilauea. 
It  struck  me  as  characteristic  (only  of  the  individual,   I 
suppose,  not  of  the  species),  how  well  the  old  gentleman 
remembered   the   little   bickerings    he   had   had   with    the 
Commodore,  whilst  he  had  forgotten  entirely  many  interest- 
ing details  of  the  journey  about  which  I  questioned  him,  and  of 
which  I  had  previously  read  an  account  in  Wilkes'  work.     The 
Doctor  expressed  a  strong  desire  to  see  the  crater  of  Mauna 
Loa  once  more.     Notwithstanding,  however,  the  road  being 
l)etter  known  nowadays,  I  think   the  old  gentleman,  with 
nearly  thirty  years  added  to  his  age  since  he  first  went  up, 
would  find  the  ascent  and  descent  of  the  great  lava  moun- 
tUQ  more  than  a  match  for  his  strength. 

23cf. — The  total  population  of  the  Hawaian  Islands  in  1866 
was  62,959,  showing  a  decrease  in  the  native  part  of  the 
population  since  1860,  six  years,  of  8901,  and  an  increase 
of  foreigners  of  1621.  The  half-castes  in  1866  numbered 
16iO;  the  foreigners,  exclusive  of  Chinese,  4194. 

Honolulu,  on  the  island  of  Oohu,  is  the  principal  town  of 
the  islands.  The  district  contained  in  1866  a  population  of 
13,521,  showing  a  decrease  in  six  years  of  789,  wholly  among 
the  natives.  The  number  of  foreigners  in  1866  was  1851, 
showiDg  an  increase  in  six  years  of  812. 

The  form  of  government  is  a  constitutional  monarchy. 
The  King  is  assisted  by  a  Privy  Council  of  State.  The 
King's  Cabinet  consists  of  Minister  of  Foreign  Afiairs, 
tenister  of  Interior,  Minister  of  Finance,  and  the  Attorney- 
(ieneral  of  the  kingdom. 
The  Legislative  Assembly  consists  of  the  nobles  appointed 
[  V  the  King  and  of  the  representatives  of  the  people  sitting 
together. 

The  Legislative  body  shall  assemble  biennially  and  receive 
compensation  for  their  services. 


2  20  GO  VERNMENT  OFFICES. 

The  King  appoints  the  uobles,  who  hold  their  appointments 
during  life.     Their  number  should  never  exceed  twenty. 

The  representatives  shall  never  be  less  than  twenty-four, 
nor  more  than  forty,  selected  biennially.  Qualification,  twenty- 
one  years  of  age,  know  how  to  read  and  write,  understand 
accounts,  a  resident  for  three  years,  own  real  estate  of  the 
value  of  500  dollars,  or  have  a  clear  income  of  250  dollars  a 
year.  Qualification  of  voters,  twenty  years  of  age,  one  year 
resident,  to  have  paid  his  taxes,  possessed  of  150  dollars  in 
real  property,  or  of  a  leasehold  property  of  the  value  of 
twenty-five  dollars  annually,  or  of  an  income  of  not  less  than 
seventy-five  dollars  a  year  from  other  sources,  and  be  able  to 
read  and  write. 

The  judicial  power  of  the  kingdom  is  vested  in  one  supreme 
court,  and  in  inferior  courts.  The  supreme  court  consists 
of  one  Chief-Justice  and  two  associate  justices. 

The  annual  property-tax  is  a  half  per  cent,  on  all  real  and 
personal  property.  There  is  a  tax  of  so  much  a  head  on  all 
horses  and  dogs.  One  licence  for  the  sale  of  opium  brings 
in  11,000  dollars  a  year.  There  are  half-a-dozen  or  more 
licences  for  retailing  spirits,  1000  dollars  a  year  each.  Traders 
licences  are  150  dollars  a  year.  The  social  evil  is  licensed 
here.  Any  man  found  cohabiting  with  a  woman  not  duly 
licensed  is  subject  to  a  fine  of  thirty  dollars,  and  the  woman 
to  a  similar  fine ;  that  is,  if  she  be  over  twelve  years  of  age; 
if  under  twelve  years  of  age,  then  the  man  may  be  imprisoned. 
I  am  told  that  cases  of  this  sort  are  every  day  brought 
before  the  police  court.  It  is  made  penal  for  any  person  to 
bring  any  woman  under  twenty-five  years  of  age  from  any 
of  the  Hawaian  Islands  to  Honolulu  without  a  licence  from 
the  Governor. 

The  sugar-planters  are  prohibited  by  law  from  taming 
their  molasses  into  rum. 

The  causes  that  are  still  operating  towards  the  ultimate 
extinction  of  this  people — the  returns  showing  year  after  year 
an  excessive  proportion  of  deaths — are  patent  enough. 

The  following  passages  are  from  a  letter  addressed  by  the 
present  Minister  of  the  Interior  to  the  late  E.  C.  Wylie, 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  in  1862 : — 


MR  HUTCHINSON'S  LETTER.  221 

"  As  to  the  ezcessiTe  proportion  of  deaths  to  the  number  of  the 
people,  Tenereal  diseases  are  the  chief  causes,  and  especially  the  syphi- 
litic poison,  th6  great  body  of  the  people  being  contaminated  with 
it  either  by  direct  contagion  or  hereditary.     It  meets  the  physician 
everywhere ;  he  cannot  walk  the  streets  of  the  town  or  move  about  the 
coontiy  without  seeing  it  in  its  most  loathsome  form.     Let  him  enter 
the  native  cottages,  and  he  will  frequently  find  its  victims  awaiting 
death  to  relieve  them  from  its  tortures.     He  sees  it  in  the  new-boru 
child ;  he  sees  children  of  all  ages  suffering  from  it,  in  many  cases  in 
its  primary  forms.    Gro  where  he  will,  the  medical  eye  detects  it,  and  if 
death  is  not  produced  by  it  directly,  the  constitutions  of  many  are  so 
enfeebled  that  they  succumb  to  the  first  attack  of  sickness ;  and,  in 
lact^  its  ravages  are  so  universal  as  of  itself  to  account  for  the  decima- 
tion of  the  people.     Another  cause  of  this  decadence  is  that  a  very 
large  proportion  of  the  children  that  are  bom  die  within  a  few  months, 
the  mothers,  especially  the  younger  ones,  being  often  unwilling  to  look 
after  them.     They  feel  an  infant  to  be  a  burden ;  it  prevents  them 
£rom  travelling  about^   and   interferes  with  their  pleasures;    conse- 
quently it  is  handed  over  to  the  care  of  the  grandmother  or  other 
relative ;  it  is  deprived  of  its  proper  nourishment,  or  gets  it  at  uncer- 
tain times ;  it  is  fed  on  cow's  milk  or  poi,  or  sweet-potato,  or  other 
improper  food.     The  result  is  the  child  is  puny,  even  if  bom  with  a 
healthy  constitution,  dies  of  marasmus  or  an  attack  of  diarrhoea,  or 
other  disease  comes  on  which  soon  carries  it  to  the  grave.     Should 
the  mother  suckle  it^  or  wish  to  do  so,  in  a  majority  of  cases  the  milk 
is  unwholesome  or  scanty,  often  suppressed  altogether ;  but  with  the 
best  milk  in  the  world,  on  the  part  of  some  parents,  should  the  child 
be  attacked  with  any  of  the  diseases  common  to  early  life,  it  dies  from 
▼ecy  slight  causes,  owing  to  the  want  of  proper  nursing,  of  which  the 
natives  are  quite  ignorant,  and  want  of  proper  nourishment,  which 
perhaps  the  friends  are  unable  or  unwilling  to  purchase,  and  if  ob- 
tained, they  do  not  know  how  to  prepare.     I  may  as  well  refer  here  to 
the  crime  of  feticide,  which  I  believe  to  be  prevalent  even  with  the 
married.     Natives  have  described  to  mo  the  mode  of  proceeding,  and 
have  named  women  who  have  practised  it  time  after  time.     From  the 
dangerous  character  of  the  operation  it  must  often  result  in  the  death 
of  Uie  mother  as  well  as  in  the  destruction  of  the  child.     Why  is  it 
that  so  few  children  are  born  among  the  native  population  ?     This  is 
the  important  subject.     The  causes  should  be  thoroughly  investigated. 
Are  they  avoidable.     I  believe  so ;  and  if  measures  can  be  devised  to 
obviate  them,  there  yet  may  be  hopes  for  the  preservation  of  the  native 
race.     I  believe  the  principal  ones  to  be  the  very  early  period  of  life 
at  which  sexual  intercourse  commences.     I  need  not  explain  to  you,  a 
phymologist,  that  sterility  must  be  the  inevitable  result. 

"  The  evil  is  doubtless  greatest  with  the  females,  but  the  virility  of 
the  male  must  also  be  impaired.  The  practice  of  polyandry  amongst 
the  females,  especially  among  the  young  ones,  is  almost  universal,  and 
in  itself  would  be  sufficient  to  prevent  conception  ;  but,  combined  with 
the  last-mentioned  causes,  the  evil  is  immensely  increased.  The  riding 
on  honaback  is  another  most  formidable  cause.    Should  conception  take 


222        STATE  OF  THE  NATIVE  POPULATION. 

]»bice,  the  practice  almost  always  canses  the  ezpuLsioQ  of  the  foetus  in 
the  early  moaths.     The  women  know  well  its  eiSectSy  and  it  is  doobt- 
iess  resorted  to  systematically  in  many  case&     I  have  previously  men- 
tioned that  young  married  couples  do  not  wish  for  children  \  they  will 
tell  you  so.     Put  the  question  to  a  healthy  pair  why  they  have  no 
children,  and  they  will  reply,  *  We  do  not  wish  for  them,  if  we  had  them 
we  must  stay  at  home,  now  we  can  go  wherever  we  please  and  e^joy 
ourselves.'     I  might  state  other  causes,  but  I  forbear.     It  will  be  snffi* 
dent  for  me  to  say,  if  a  woman  bhngs  an  infuit  into  the  world,  there 
are  plenty  of  her  own  sex  able  and  willing  to  instruct  her  in  the  best 
means  to  avoid  such  a  misfortune  for  the  future.     I  consider  the  above 
to  be  the  principal  reasons  of  the  rapid  decrease  of  the  native  popula- 
tion, and  it  is  my  conviction  that  the  decrease  will  become  greater 
within  the  next  few  years.     The  evils  are  increasing  daily  ;  numbers 
of  old  persons,  and  persons  of  adult  age,  must  nece^arily  be  removed 
shortly  in  the  course  of  nature  ;  disease  of  all  kinds  is  dcdng  its  deadly 
work,  and  there  are  few  growing  up  to  fill  the  gap.     The  people  an 
ihmroMfjhljf  demoralised.     I  use  the  last  word  in  its  widest  sigiufication. 
Villages  containing  a  number  of  families  have  not  a  chUd  bom  to  than, 
or  if  one  or  two  should  see  the  light,  death  seixes  them  within  a  few 
months.     I  frequently  found  this  to  be  the  case  whilst  engaged  in  my 
vaccinating  duties.     Settlements  are  vanishing  in  all  directions^  others 
reduced  to  one  or  two  houses,  and  the  destruction  of  cottages  is  uni- 
versal throughout  the  country.     You  may  ride  for  miles  and  hardly 
meet  a  human  being.     Xo  new  villages  appear  to  show  that  the  people 
are  merely  migrating.     Doubtless  a  number  of  those  who  disappear 
from  the  country  parts  find  their  way  to  Honolulu  or  other  se^Kxti^ 
and  this  is  the  reason.  I  believe,  why  you  who  live,  at  Honolulu  isjl  to 
realise  the  true  condition  of  things  in  the  rural  districts.     You  see  the 
people  around  you  keeping  up  their  numbers,  and  you  do  not  know 
that  they  are  recruited  at  the  expense  of  the  remoter  districtSy  the  head 
devouring  the  extremities.     Should  you  be  determined  to  attempt  a 
remedy  for  the  evils  with  which  this  unfortunate  country  is  afllicted,  it 
should  be  done  at  once  :  there  is  no  time  to  lose  ;  half  measures  will 
be  useless.     The  cant  cry  of  remedying  them  by  education  must  neoes- 
sarilv  be  a  failure,  as  before  the  leaven  can  work  the  nation  will  have 
disappeared  from  the  earth." 

What  a  sad  picture  is  the  foregoing,  drawn  by  the  Minister 
of  the  Interior  in  1SC2,  of  the  state  of  morals  among  the 
native  population  of  the  Hawaian  Islands !  His  foreboding  of 
a  ceutinual  decrease  in  their  numbers,  so  far  as  the  time  will 
permit,  has  been  more  than  realised,  for  it  has  been  shown 
that  between  ISGO  and  1S66  the  decrease  amounted  to  8901. 
The  first  missionaries  (Protestant)  came  to  these  islands  in 
the  year  1820,  and  ever  since  very  few  years  have  passed 
without  seeing  some  accession  to  their  numbers.  The  mis- 
sionaries have,  in  fact,  had  the  field  to  themselyeB  since 


MISSIONARY  LABOURS.  223 

1820  for  fifty  years,  and  a  more  docile  people,  or  a  people 
more  easily  swayed  for  good  (or  for  evil  perhaps  also),  have 
never  been  subjected  to  missionary  power  than  the  native 
Hawaians.     How  is  it  then,  one  naturally  asks,  that  after 
nearly  fifty  years  of  subjection  to  missionary  government,  we 
find  a  decrease  in  the  native  population  in  forty-three  years 
of  about  85,000  souls,  that  is,  from  142,000  in  1823,  to  about 
57,000  in  1866  ?  and  also  that  Mr  Hutchinson,  Minister  of 
the  Interior,  should  be  driven  to  declare  in  1862  that  the 
<^  people  are  thoroughly  demoralised ;  "  using,  as  he  declares, 
this  last  word  ^^  in  its  widest  signification  "  ?    How  is  this  ? 
Have  we  not  a  right  to  expect  that  a  knowledge  of  Christi- 
inity  should  have  done  something  for  the  morals  of  this  peo- 
ple? that  the  morality  of  their  lives  should  have  improved 
upon  what  it  was  when  Cook  first  came  among  them,  which 
it  can  hardly  have  done,  since  Mr  Hutchinson  declares  they 
are  now  **  thoroughly  demoralised  "  ?    The  missionaries  are  a 
legion  in  these  islands,  if  one  may  judge  of  their  numbers  by 
the  number  of  churches  and  comfortable  missionary  establish- 
ments one  sees  everywhere.     They  ought  to  be  quite  equal  to 
the  work  they  have  to  do,  one  would  think.     When  Cook 
▼isited  these  islands  he  believed  the  population  to  have  been 
400,000;  now  it  has  dwindled  down  to  perhaps  less  than 
50,000,  and  with  an  almost  certainty  of  entire  extinction  in 
ktt  than  fifty  years  more,  unless  the  penal  laws  which  have 
J*tely  been  enacted  to  oblige  them  to  be  moral  should  prove 
to  be  more  efficient  for  the  object  than  so  much  missionary 
^hing  and  preaching.    But  no,  we  cannot  ho{)e  for  any  such 
^ult;  these  people  are«  doomed,  and  in  half  a  century  more 
ttey  will  exist  only  in  memory.     What  has  been  the  treat- 
JJient  to  which  the  natives  have  been  subject,  and  which  has 
i^nght  about   so  lamentable  a  result?     Is  it  that  their 
teachers  have  thought  if  they  made  them  religious,  morality 
^ould  be  sure  to  follow  ?  if  they  fitted  them  for  entry  into 
the  next  world  by  indoctrinating  them  into  the  mysteries  of 
the  Christian  religion,  their  duty  to  themselves  and  to  society 
in  this  world  might  be  safely  left  to  their  own  management  ? 
Whatever  the  notions  of  the  missionaries  might  have  been, 
their  treatment  of  the  natives  has  been  a  dead  failure  so  far 


224  MISSIONAR  Y  LABOURS. 

as  results  are  concerned.  Their  last  state  is  worse  than  their 
first — they  are  now  "  thoroughly  demoralised ;  **  and  so  con- 
vinced is  the  lay  Government  of  this,  to  save  the  still  exist- 
ing remnant  of  these  people,  that  at  the  last  moment  they 
have  enacted  penal  laws  in  the  vain  hope  that,  by  such  a 
procedure,  they  may  be  enabled  to  arrest  the  threatened 
annihilation — as  if  penal  laws  were  ever  found  to  make 
immoral  people  moral ! 

These  in  reality  thoroughly  demoralised  people  are  out- 
wardly very  religious ;  they  go  regularly  to  church,  and  reli- 
giously abstain  from  all  kinds  of  work  on  Sundays ;  so  much 
so,  that  last  Sunday  week,  when  I  arrived  from  Hawaii,  I 
was  coolly  told  by  our  Chinaman  steward  that  I  should  have 
to  leave  my  carpet-bag  on  board  until  the  next  day,  for  no 
one  would  dare  to  carry  it  for  me  to  my  lodgings  on  a  Sun- 
day I  The  French  Boman  Catholic  missionaries  in  these 
islands  are,  I  am  told,  a  very  devoted  and  earnest  set  of  men. 
They  go  much  more  among  the  natives  than  other  mission- 
aries, attending  to  their  temporal  as  well  as  to  their  spiritual 
wants,  looking  after  them  in  sickness,  and  helping  them  in 
times  of  scarcity;  they  know  no  superfluities,  no  luxuries, 
scarcely  indeed  the  common  comforts  of  ordinary  life. 

The  Protestant  missionaries,  on  the  contrary,  are  all  com- 
fortably located ;  some  of  them  are  rich,  possessing  lands, 
and  herds,  and  flocks.  They  no  doubt  turn  this  little  king- 
dom of  the  Hawaian  Islands  to  good  account  for  themselves 
and  their  families. 

The  men  in  power,  too,  filling  Government  situations, 
must  find  this  tiny  kingdom  a  comfortable  retreat.  There  is 
here  pretty  nearly  all  the  paraphernalia  of  a  European  king- 
dom. There  is  a  Minister  of  Foreign  llelations,  a  Minister 
of  Finance,  a  Minister  of  Interior,  and  an  Attorney-GteneraL 
There  is  a  supreme  court  with  a  Chief-Justice,  two  associate 
judges,  with  a  clerk  and  an  assistant-clerk.  There  are  five 
circuit  judges.  There  is  a  Collector- General  of  Customs, 
a  Postmaster-General,  a  Registrar  of  Conveyances,  a 
Superintendent  of  Waterworks,  a  Superintendent  of  Public 
Works,  a  jailer,  a  harbour-master,  and  two  pilots.  All  these 
offices    have   what    are  called  good   salaries  -  attached  to 


SAND  WICH  ISLANDS.  325 

them,  and  are  nearly  all  filled  by  Americans  principally.* 
Then  there  is  the  Privy  Council  of  State,  the  Cabinet,  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Instruction,  the  Bureau  of  Immigration, 
the  Govemors  of  the  eight  islands  that  form  the  group. 
When  one  reads  over  this  formidable  list  of  offices  created 
for  the  government  of  a  group  of  islands  containing  a 
population  not  exceeding  probably  to-day  50,000  souls,  and 
lessening  day  by  day,  and  not  equalling  that  of  many  of  our 
country  towns,  one  is  apt  to  exclaim.  Surely  many  of  these 
offices  might  be  rolled  up  into  one,  and  the  duties  attached 
to  them  performed  by  very  many  fewer  persons  than  are  now 
employed  ?  The  duties  of  the  three  ministers,  for  example, 
might  they  not  be  fulfilled  by  one  good  working  man  ?  Can 
it  be  necessary  to  have  three  men  salaried  to  do  the  work  of 
the  Foreign  Office,  the  Finance  Office,  and  of  the  Interior, 
for  a  kingdom  containing  a  population  of  about  50,000 
Bools?  The  revenue  amounts  to  about  half  a  million  of 
dollars,  and  the  expenditure  to  about  the  same  amount,  a 
pretty  large  figure  for  a  Lilliputian  kingdom,  with  no  public 
debt,  no  army,  no  navy  to  keep  up.  I  beg  the  King's  par- 
don, he  has  an  army,  100  men,  commanded  by  a  colonel ;  and 
a  navy  too,  consisting  of  one  merchant-steamer,  now  about 
to  commence  running  between  the  islands,  one  tug-steamer, 
and  one  steam-dredge.  There  is  also  a  little  sailing  schooner, 
which  I  believe  is  the  King's  own  property.  The  establish- 
ment consists  of  an  admiral,  paid,  I  am  told,  by  the  King 
himself.  The  native  population  is  very  poor,  and  may  be 
considered  highly  taxed — ten  dollars  a  head.  The  present 
King  goes  in  for  the  ^^  almighty  "  dollar  ;  he  owns  cattle, 
estates,  and  fish-ponds,  from  which  he  draws  a  good  revenue, 
and  I  was  told  he  did  own  a  butcher's  shop  in  Hilo  for  the 
sale  of  his  own  fat  cattle,  but  he  was  shamed  out  of  it,  and 
obliged  to  shut  it  up.  He  is  a  very  fat  man,  about  forty 
years  of  age,  and  is  said  to  be  a  good  deal  under  the  influ- 
ence of  an  old  native  woman  whom  the  public  call  a  sor- 
ceress. His  Majesty  may  be  seen  any  day  driving  a  pair  of 
horses  in  an  open  carriage  about  Honolulu,  dressed  in  a  dirty 

*  Who  knows  bat  tha  taking  of  the  Fiji  lalandB  under  Britiah  protection  may 
not  soon  lead  to  the  United  States  doing  the  same  good  office  for  the  Sandwich 
UUnda! 


936  HONOLULU. 

white  jacket  and  a  Onayaqiul  hat,  aooompamed  by  the 
admiral.  He  gets  for  himself  some  22^000  dollan  a  year 
out  of  the  half  million  revenue  of  the  kingdom. 

25M. — I  wentto  church  to-day  to  hear  the  music, presided orer 
by  Mrs  Dominus^wife  of  the  governor  of  this  town;  in  this  I  was 
disappointed,  for  the  morning  was  wholly  occupied  by  an  exa- 
mination of  school  children,  probably  Sunday-school,  to  the 
number,  perhaps,  of  a  couple  of  hundreds.    Of  course  I  did 
not  understand  a  word  of  what  I  heard,  but  I  could  not  but 
remark  that  the  children  answered  the  questions  put  to  them 
very  glibly ;  several  of  them  made  speeches  which  evidently 
gave   satisfaction   to   the   congregation.      The   singing,  rf 
which  we  had  a  considerable  amount,  I  thought  very  good. 
One  of  the  first  things  that  strikes  a  stranger  arriving  at 
these  islands,  is  the  soft  voice  possessed  by  the  natives,  and 
possibly  some  day  or  other  we  may  see  a  Wyhine  fi.guring  as 
prima  donna  on  the  boards  of  the  Opera  House  in  London. 
More  unlikely  things  have  come  to  pass.     After  the  exami- 
nation was  concluded,  two  clergymen,  outsiders,  mounted 
the  rostrum  to  say  a  few  words  in  English  to  the  children. 
I  cannot  say  much  for  either  of  them ;  what  fell  firom  them, 
was  very  vapid,  and  certainly  not  at  all  to  the  point     Iia 
talking  this  morning  to  a  clever  lawyer  here,  he  said  tho 
King's  whole  thoughts  are  bent  on  amassing  wealth,  thougta. 
he  has  neither  wife  nor  child  to  provide  for.    As  I  said  before 
he  fattens  cattle  on  his  own  estates ;  slaughters  and  sell^ 
them  in  Honolalu.     He  is  constantly  speculating  in  salt  onr 
poiy  or  some  other  article  of  general  consumption,  and  every 
day  becomes  more  miserly. 

The  revenue  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Hawaian  Islands  (tib^e 
population  of  which  in  1866,  including  foreigners,  was  62,959^ 
for  the  two  years  ending  31st  March  1870,  amounted  ix> 
834,112  dollars,  derived  from  the  following  sources: — 

Customs,  import  duties, 
Licences,  trade,         .... 
lotemal  taxes,  .... 

Fees,  stamps,  and  perquisites, 
Government  realisations,  rents,  wharfage^ 
post-office,  .... 

Miscellaneous  receipts, 
Fines,  penalties,  and  costs,   . 


362,735 

Owti. 
96 

104,767 

166,506 

23,389 

68 
76 
70 

120,368 
19,686 
36,658 

25 
6 

24 

STATISTICS. 


327 


Expenditure  for  the  two  years  enc 

Civil  List,*       .... 
Permanent  Settlements,t 
Legialatiipe  and  Privy  Council, 
Judiciary  Department, 
Department— Foreign  Af&iirs  and  War, 
Department  of  the  Jmterior,    . 
Department  of  Finance, 
Attorney-General's  department^' 
Bureau  of  Public  Instruction, 
MiaoeUaneous, .... 


DolB. 
50,000 
24,000 
16,900 
76,862 
88,438 
455,923 
127,730 
94,040 
92,135 
11,673 

1,036,703 


Oente. 


50 

•  •  • 

35 

24 
45 

•  •• 
99 

53 


*  Tlw  Kng,  45,000  dob. ;  the  Chamherhiiii,  5000  dols. 

t  Qieea  Emma,  12,000  doli. ;  Kalama,  4000  dohL  ;  KekaaaaTa,  8000  dola 


CHAPTER  XL 

New  Zealand— Auckland— Orabamitown— Gold  minet— Wagei— Too  mftny  ( 

places— Strong  men — Freeh-looking  women — Delieioua  dimate — ^vdleano  of 
Tongarero— New  Plymouth— Nelson— Birda—Animali—Charch  and  dumd— 
Vegetation— Pictou  gold  mines— Wellington— The  Governor*!  hairdrewer  Hatt 
vidley — Wages— Maories—**  How-How  '—The  religion  of  the  men — Naihrci 
fast  dying  out — Causes— Ghristohurch — Blunt  clergyman — Aurora  Austnlit— 
Museum— Trout-hatching— Skeletons  of  extinct  birds — Wool-working— Flax- 
mills— Immigrants  wanted — Artesian  wells— Southern  Alps — Farms  and  sheq^ 
runs  — Eels  — Whitebait  — Forests  — Gold-diggers  of  Hokitika  —  Waimea  sad 
Canary  diggings — Plymouth  Brethren — Jade  found — California  (Chineae)  pnmp 
— Rivers  become  torrents— Fine  farm,  prize  bull  and  ram,  sheep  cheap— Boona 
for  Melbourne — Oamaru  rich  in  grain  and  wool — ^]>unedin — Sootch  Free  Ghnzeh 
— Bich  gold  mines— Fine  lands — ^Railway. 

I  EMBARKED  on  the  28th  September  on  board  the  City  of 
Melbourne  steamer^  bonnd  for  Auckland,  arriving  there  Octo- 
ber 17,  after  an  eighteen  days'  passage.  Fine  weather  all 
the  way.  Distance  from  Honolulu  to  Auckland  4080  miles. 
On  the  19th  October  I  took  a  steamer  at  Auckland,  and, 
after  four  hours'  voyage,  found  myself  at  Grahamstown, 
the  offspring  of  the  Thames  diggings,  which  were  commenced 
three  years  ago.  After  depositing  my  bag  and  umbrella  at 
the  Governor  Bowen  Hotel  I  sallied  out  to  look  at  the 
mines.  My  underground  exploration  was  limited  to  visiting 
the  works  of  the  Golden  Crown,  in  which  there  are  some 
sixty  men  employed.  The  lowest  point  reached  on  the  quarti 
reef  in  this  mine  is  eighty  feet  below  the  sea-level ;  and, 
although  not  further  than  a  hundred  yards  from  the  sea- 
shore,  there  is  very  little  water  in  the  mine ;  that  is,  no  more 
than  they  require  for  washing  the  crushed  ore  in  their 
battery,  as  the  crushing-mill  is  called  here.  This  reef  at  the 
lowest  level  is  about  four  feet  wide,  though  it  varies  very 
much.  There  are  twenty  stamps  at  work  in  the  mill,  crush- 
ing daily  some  twenty  tons  ore,  of  which  the  produce  varies 
from  one  to  three  ounces  a  ton.  The  Golden  Crown  is  said 
to  be  one  of  the  best,  if  not  the  best,  mine  of  the  district 
In  1868  and  1869  it  paid  in  dividends  to  the  shareholders 


GOLD  MINES^GRAHAMSTOWN— AUCKLAND.  229 

£53,000,  and  it  is  now  considered  to  be  worth  nearly,  if  not 
quite,  £400,000.  The  Long  Drive  is  another  very  rich  mine, 
and  at  present  is'  paying  a  monthly  dividend,  of  from  forty  to 
fiftj  pounds  on  shares  that  might  be  bought  in  the  market 
tt  £500. 

The  total  value  of  gold  exported  from  New  Zealand  up  to 
December  1868  is  £17,000,000  sterling,  of  which  two  and  a 
iaif  millions  came  from  the  Thames  diggings.     The  miners* 
wages  vary  from  30s.  to  40s.  a  week.      The  range  of  hills 
behind  Grahamstown  must  be  some  700  to  800  feet  high, 
the  spurs   through   which   the   quartz   reefs   run   reaching 
almost  down  to  the  sea-shore.     The  face  of  these  hills  is 
thickly  studded  with  holes  or  short  tunnels,  the  work  of  pro- 
spectors, most  of  which  are  now  abandoned.     The  number 
of  mines  being  now  actually  worked  in  the  Thames  district 
cannot  exceed  seventy,  and  all  worked  by  companies.    Miners* 
cottages  dot  the  face  of  the  hills  everywhere  to  the  height 
of  four  or  five  bundred  feet,  and  when  lighted  up  at  night 
have  a*  very  pretty  appearance.     There  is  no  mine  in  the 
district  deeper  than  350  feet.     The  Golden  Crown  produced 
from  1st  July  1868  to  November  1869,  29,000  ounces  of  gold. 
The  average  yield  of  the   Thames  may  be   put   down   at 
three  ounces  per  ton;    of  the  Victoria  gold  mines  twelve 
pennyweights ;    Nova  Scotia,  one  ounce,  one  pennjrweight ; 
California,  one  ounce,  two  pennyweights. 

Auckland  has  some  45,000  inhabitants.  There  are  some 
good  buUdings  in  the  town,  of  brick  and  stone,  but  the 
houses  generally  are  of  wood.  Miserable  hotels  abound  there, 
but  not  a  single  moderately  comfortable  house  in  the  place. 
Saloons  and  drinking-bars  are  met  with  at  every  turn.  I 
walked  up  the  main  street  in  Grahamstown  a  distance  of 
400  paces,  and  counted  within  that  range  twenty-one  drinking- 
saloons :  verily  the  miners  earn  their  money  V!&&  horses,  and, 
as  the  saying  is,  spend  it  like  asses.  Auckland  has  certainly 
a  nucleus  of  houses  forming  streets  which  might  be  called  a 
town,  but  generally  otherwise  the  place  consists  of  vei^* 
small  wooden  buildings  spread  over  a  large  area.  The  site 
of  the  town  is  good,  and  the  port  is  magnificent — large 
enough  to  hold  all  the  ships  in  the  world.  I  stayed  at  the 
Waitemata  Hotel,  and  paid  for  bed  and  board  si^  shillings  a 


230    AUCKLAND— GRAHAMSTOWN— 

day.  Coming  from  Califomiay  the  hotel  chaiges  and  price 
of  labomr  seem  very  low.  Your  board  at  the  hotela  is 
well  enongh,  bat  y omr  lodging  is  signally  incomplete  and 
destitute  of  comfort  At  Grahamstown  (at  the  diggings) 
there  are  two  hotels  infinitely  superior  to  anything  to  be  met 
with  at  Auckland.  Adjoining  on  to  Gnduunstown  is  the 
town  of  Shortlandy  which  sprang  up  when  the  reefs  were 
first  conmienced  to  be  worked ;  it  is  now,  with  the  decadence 
of  the  gold  fever,  a  dead  letter ;  the  money  spent  in  building 
it  being  as  completely  lost  as  if  it  were  thrown  into  the  sea ; 
at  least  so  they  tell  me.  There  is  one  thing  that  cannot 
escape  the  most  casual  observer ;  the  whole  population  seems 
composed  of  strong  athletic  young  men  and  of  healthy 
firesh-looking  women,  the  latter  very  few  when  compaied 
with  the  number  of  men.  The  children  are  pictures  of 
health,  a  vast  change  from  the  poor  pale  little  things,  chil- 
dren of  white  people,  whom  I  left  behind  me  at  the  Hawaiui 
Islands.  The  climate  here  so  far  is  delicious,  and  I  am  told 
the  present  weather  is  a  fair  sample  of  what  might  be  ex- 
pected for  the  next  six  months. 

On  driving  across  from  Auckland  to  Onehunga,  six  and 
a  half  miles,  to  embark  for  Wellington,  we  found  a  consider- 
able extent  of  hedgerow  covered  with  roses  and  furze  in  full 
bloom.  So  far  as  this  latter  is  concerned,  I  might  have  been 
riding  over  a  conmion  at  home;  the  scenery  looked  very 
English. 

%\st. — Embarked  on  board  the  Airedale  for  Wellington. 
On  our  way  down  took  a  Prussian  schooner  in  tow,  and  cast 
her  off  when  clear  of  the  heads ;  the  volcano  of .  Tongarero 
shining  brightly.  The  port  of  Manukau,  down  through 
which  we  passed  from  Onehunga,  is  the  port  for  which 
H.M.S.  Orpheus  was  bound  when  she  missed  the  bar  at  the 
entrance  and  went  on  the  reef  some  few  years  ago. 

22rf,  morning. — Anchored  off  Taranaki,  or  New  Plymouth, 
half  a  mile  from  the  beach.  The  boats  employed  here  in 
landing  goods  and  passengers  are  somewhat  like  those 
employed  for  the  same  purpose  at  Madras.  We  received 
several  passengers  here.  New  Plymouth  consists  of  houses 
straggling  over  a  mile  or  two  of  ground ;  at  least  from  the 
steamer  we  can  see  nothing  like  a  street    The  countiy 


NORFOLK  ISLAND  FJNE-^NELSON  231 

about  here  is  very  fertile.  Around  Auckland  there  is  a 
large  yariety  of  ornamental  pines  growing,  and  among  them 
the  Norfolk  Island  pine  is  very  conspicuous  for  its  beauty ; 
that  is,  when  there  is  not  too  great  a  length  of  bare  stem 
between  the  whorls  of  boughs ;  when  this  is  the  case,  the 
tree  lacks  much  of  its  beauty.  I  saw  some  of  these  pines 
folly  100  feet  high. 

2ML — We  got  into  Nelson  yesterday  morning  after  a 
smart  run  during  the  night,  when  the  little  Airedale  rolled 
as  she  was  said  never  to  have  roUed  before ;  the  wind  nearly 
afty  and  the  sea  on  the  quarter.  I  landed  for  a  run  before 
breakfast,  and  went  to  the  top  of  Signal  Hill  (250  feet  high), 
and  there  I  heard  the  skylark  singing  merrily,  and  watched 
it  soaring  aloft,  just  as  it  does  on  a  fine  summer's  morning 
on  B.  Common. 

The  skylark  was  brought  here  four  or  five  years  ago. 
English  pheasants  abound,  and  also  about  Auckland  and  on 
the  hills  there  are  deer.  Horned  cattle,  and  pigs,  and  rats 
were,  they  say,  the  only  animals  in  the  island  indigenous  to 
it.  Surely  these  animals  also  must  have  been  brought  here 
at  some  time  or  other  ?  The  Creator  of  all  things,  if  He 
created  any  animals  for  this  island,  would  never  have  held 
His  hand  at  a  rat  or  a  pig,  or  even  a  bulL  He  could  not 
have  behaved  so  stingily  to  a  country  so  well  adapted  for 
the  support  of  all  animals  now  found  in  temperate  climes. 
No ;  these  animals  must  have  been  brought  here  some  time 
or  other  by  ships,  about  which  we  know  nothing. 

Swfuday. — After  breakfast  I  walked  to  the  town  and  went 
to  church.  On  the  way  I  asked  a  little  girl  which  was  the 
Episcopal  church.  ^^  Don't  know,"  she  said ;  ^^  I  goes  to  the 
Wesleyan."  I  found  the  church,  nevertheless;  along,  narrow 
building,  a  rail  across  the  middle  of  it  separating  the  free 
seats  from  the  others;  and  the  free  seats  are  at  such  a 
distance  from  the  preacher,  or  at  least  most  of  them,  that 
hearing  is  out  of  the  question.  The  distance  to  the  church 
from  the  port  must  be  nearly  two  miles.  The  town  is 
regularly  laid  out  in  a  plain,  on  three  sides  of  which  are 
high  hiUs  sending  their  spurs  right  down  into  it  The  sea 
is  seen  on  the  fourth  side.  There  are  many  trees  and 
shrubs  mixed  up  with  the  houses,  and  flower-gardens  every- 


23a  NELSON— PICTOU. 

where.  Nelson,  I  am  told,  is  famed  for  its  fmit  and  its 
flowers ;  nevertheless,  the  man  at  the  signal  staff  complained 
that  the  fmit  was  dear,  and  that  he  never  conld  bnj  a 
dozen  of  peaches  under  one  shilling,  though  at  that  price  he 
admitted  they  were  fine  and  large.  Eggs,  Is.  a  dozen  in 
sunmier,  and  2s.  6d.  in  winter;  beef  up  to  7d.,  and  mutton 
at  3d.  the  pound.  An  estate  near  the  Signal  Hill  was 
staked  out  into  quarter-acre  lots  for  building  upon,  and  was 
selling  at  20s.  and  30s.  a  foot  frontage,  a  pretty  high  price 
for  land  in  New  Zealand.  The  town  contains  about  5000 
souls,  and  has  but  little  trade  beyond  supplying  the  West 
Coast  diggings  with  what  they  require ;  there  is  little  or  no 
cultivated  land  about  it  In  the  evening  we  steamed  out  of 
harbour  with  a  considerable  accession  to  the  number  of  our 
passengers.  Nelson  is  a  bar  harbour,  with  nineteen  feet 
water  on  the  bar  at  spring-tides.  Only  one  ship  in  the 
port 

26^^. — We  were  eight  hours  in  getting  to  Pictou  from 
Nelson,  the  water  like  a  mill-pond  all  the  way.  Pictou  is 
situated  up  at  the  head  of  Queen  Charlotte's  Sound.  We 
made  a  short  cut  towards  it  by  coming  through  the  French 
Pass,  which  is  very  narrow,  hardly  as  wide  as  the  AxredoLle\& 
long,  instead  of  passing  outside  and  around  D'Hrville  Island. 
We  were  two  hours  and  a  half  in  steering  up  Queen  Char- 
lotte's Sound,  after  rounding  Ca2)e  Jackson,  before  we  reached 
Pictou.  It  seemed  a  place  stowed  away  at  the  head  of  the 
sound,  in  order  that  nobody  might  find  it,  so  snugly  is  it 
located.  There  was  a  rush  of  gold-diggers  to  Pictou  from 
the  Otago  district  some  two  or  three  years  ago,  and  it  was 
that  circumstance  that  gave  an  impetus  to  the  erection  of 
houses  there.  The  gold,  whatever  there  was  of  it  in  the 
neighbourhood,  was  very  soon  all  taken  away,  and  with  it 
the  diggers  went  away  also,  leaving  the  place  in  a  worse  con- 
dition than  they  found  it  Now  you  might  buy  town  lots  for 
six  pounds  that  cost  sixty  during  the  gold  fever.  Inland 
from  Pictou  is  situated  Blenheim,  now  the  scat  of  the  pro- 
vincial government,  as  Pictou  once  was.  Alas  I  poor  Pictoo. 
The  Government-house  is  now  inhabited,  the  sole  occupant 
being  the  policeman!  The  Pictouians  do  not  lose  heart, 
however ;  they  are  now  looking  to  obtain  a  share  of  the  loan 


PORT  NICHOLSON-^GOVERNORS  BARBER.    233 

lately  raised  in  England  by  the  colony,  with  which  to  build 
a  ndlway  to  Blenheim,  to  bring  down  the  produce  from 
thence  for  shipment;  and  certainly  a  finer  harbour  than 
Pictou  does  not  exist  anywhere.  Even  now  there  are  a  good 
many  people  scattered  about  in  small  wooden  houses,  but  how 
they  subsist  seemed  to  me  a  wonder.  I  asked  an  old  Scotch- 
man whom  I  met  with  a  small  keg  of  beer  in  a  wheel- 
barrow, how  the  people  in  Pictou  managed  to  live  ?  "  Oh," 
he  replied,  ^Hhey  live  as  the  flies  do."  The  place  at  present, 
he  said,  absolutely  produced  nothing  for  export,  and  beyond 
a  few  garden  vegetables,  nothing  at  all.  I  discovered 
afterwards,  however,  that  there  was  a  saw-mill,  or  perhaps 
two,  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  that  an  occasional  shipment 
of  sawn  timber  took  place.  The  situation  of  the  town  is 
picturesque. 

27fA. — We  remained  at  anchor  until  midnight,  and  then 
proceeded  out  of  the  sound  by  Tory  Strait,  and  at  6  A.M. 
yesterday  we  steamed  into  Nicholson,  the  port  of  the  town 
of  Wellington,  the  capital,  or  at  any  rate  the  seat  of  the 
Government,  though  in  point  of  population  it  ranks  only 
third  or  fourth  among  the  towns  of  New  Zealand.  This 
also  is  a  magnificent  port,  completely  landlocked,  and  equal 
to  holding  any  amount  of  shipping.  The  town  is  built  with 
some  regularity,  the  houses  mostly  of  wood.  Even  the 
Grovemment-house,  now  being  built,  an  edifice  of  some  pre- 
tensions, is  of  wood,  as  are  also  the  Roman  Catholic  and 
Protestant  cathedrals.  The  population  is  about  25,000.  The 
town  extends  from  the  water- side  up  to  the  foot  of  some 
moderately  high  hills,  but  has  no  such  country-houses 
around  it  as  are  to  be  seen  at  Auckland.  In  fact,  it  is  a 
dead-and-alive  place  this  Wellington,  and  not  at  all  to  be 
compared  to  Auckland,  either  in  its  buildings,  its  situation, 
or  its  commerce.  It  has  one  advantage  over  Auckland,  it 
can  boast  of  better  hotels.  I  have  just  read  a  certificate, 
handsomely  framed,  in  the  window  of  a  barber's  shop,  inform- 
ing the  public  that  the  fortunate  occupant  had  just  been 
appointed  hairdresser  to  the  Governor  I  What  next  ?  News 
received  yesterday  of  the  destruction  of  the  town  of  Lyttleton 
by  fire;  went  to  see  a  celebrated  conjuror,  half  the  receipts 
being  given  for  the  relief  of  the  Lyttleton  sufferers. 


234  HUTT  VALLEY— FRENCH  PRIEST. 

Grot  on  the  top  of  her  Majesty's  royal  mail-coach  yester- 
day and  paid  a  visit  to  the  Hatt  valley,  which  is  about 
seventy  miles  in  len^h  and  abont  two  miles  wide  in  ifci 
broadest  part  The  road  is  very  good,  and  extends  for  about 
six  miles  along  the  base  of  the  hills ;  and  here  it  reaches 
what  may  be  called  the  head-waters  of  Port  Nichokon,  and 
enters  the  valley.  The  principal  part  of  the  land  ia  nnder 
pasture,  and  not  quite  cleared  of  trunks  of  trees.  I  saw  but 
little  nnder  the  plough,  although  there  is,  I  believe,  some 
grain  grown.  The  ploughed  land  I  did  see  was  under  pota- 
toes and  pease.  I  am  told  the  land,  which  is  good  soil,  lets 
in  this  valley  from  £2  to  £4  an  acre,  and  cannot  be  bought 
unless  at  a  price  that  seems  to  me  to  be  exorbitant — from 
£25  to  £100  an  acre.  The  Lower  Hutt,  which  has  a  rise  of 
some  eighteen  feet  in  eighteen  miles  from  the  head  of  the 
harbour,  is  often  flooded,  the  water  in  heavy  and  continued 
rains  pouring  down  in  torrents  from  the  high  hills  which 
extend  on  both  sides  of  the  valley  in  its  whole  extent  One 
meets  with  not  more  than  half-a-dozen  well-built  wooden 
houses  in  the  valley ;  the  rest  are  mere  shells.  I  got  into 
conversation  with  some  men  working  on  the  road,  breaking 
stones  and  keeping  the  road  in  order.  Those  employed  in 
breaking  stones  earned  3s.  the  cubic  yard,  and  in  a  long 
day*s  work  they  could  break  three  yards — thus  earning  Os. 
a  day ;  the  others  (day-labourers)  earned  6s.  a  day,  and  have 
very  little  broken  time  during  the  whole  year.  They  said, 
however,  the  road  surveyor  was  very  irregular  in  paying 
them,  and  just  now  was  owing  them  five  months'  wages. 
This  was  hardly  right  in  a  country  where  money  is  worth 
ten  per  cent,  interest 

A  little  French  Catholic  priest  with  whom  I  travelled  on 
the  top  of  the  coach,  in  talking  about  the  Maories,  among 
whom  he  passed  a  good  deal  of  his  time,  said  the  new 
religion,  as  he  called  it,  the  ^^  How  -  How,"  had  many 
followers,  and  that  he  thought  there  were  very  few  among 
the  natives  now  that  were  sincere  Christians ;  and  further, 
that  he  believed  it  would  be  found  to  be  a  difficult,  if  not  a 
hopeless,  task  ever  to  make  the  bulk  of  the  natives  embraoe 
Christianity.  The  ^^  How-How "  religion  was  based  upon 
some  portion  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  was  greatly  dis- 


MAOSIES— DYING  OUT—LYTTLETON,        335 

figured  by  a  belief  in  witchcraft.    The  worship  of  idols  was 

extinct  among  them,  and  they  all  now  believed  in  a  Gk>d. 

Stere  were  few  missionaries  among  them,  for  the  Maories, 

he  thought,  had.  lost  much  of  the  respect  they  at  one  time 

liad  for  them ;  they  had  been  told  so  many  different  stories, 

that  they  now  put  bat  little  faith  in  anything  foreigners 

told  them;    they  had  now  re-entered  into  themselves,  as  it 

were,  and  depended  more  upon  themselves  in  the  matter 

of  religion   than   they  had  done,  as  well  as  in  all  other 

matters.     They  were  fast  dying  out,  he  said;  and  this  he 

attribnted  to  the  wearing  of  warmer  clothing  than  they  had 

been  accustomed  to,  and  to   the   excessive  use  of  ardent 

spirits,  and  in  some  measure  to  a  change  of  food ;  and.  Sir 

George  Orey  adds,  to  the  want  of  excitement  in  which  they 

formerly  lived,  consequent  upon  a  state  of  warfare  in  which 

the  different  tribes  were  always  engaged  among  themselves. 

My  friend  the  priest  had  been  a  long  resident  in  the  country, 

aad  part  of  his  duty  was  performed  in  the  Lower  Hutt, 

where  he  administered  once  a  month  to  the  spiritual  wants 

of  the  few  European  Catholics  (English  and  German  prin- 

cqudly)  who  reside  there.    The  native  trees  have  pretty  well 

dis^peared  from  the  valley,  and  here  and  about  Wellington 

ornamental  trees  from  Australia — the  blue  gum  principally 

— have   been   planted,  and  grow  very  fast      I  have   not 

observed  a  single  Norfolk  Island  pine  here.     It  blew  a  gale 

of  wind  yesterday  from  the  north-west,  and  so  it  is  doing 

to-day,   but    from   the  opposite    direction  —  south-east — 

accompanied   by   torrents   of    rain.       Temperature   in   my 

room  52^ 

I  embarked  in  the  09;z^a  yesterday,  and  arrived  at  Lyttleton, 
the  port  of  Christchurch,  at  5.30  p.m.  next  day,  Saturday,  in 
time  to  catch  the  last  train  for  this  place,  Christchurch.  The 
tnin  was  very  full  of  passengers,  who  had  come  down  to  look 
it  the  havoc  made  by  the  fire,  which  on  the  night  of  the  24th 
had  destroyed  two-thirds  of  the  town  of  Lyttleton,  built  prin- 
cipally of  wood.  I  am  at  a  comfortable  inn,  the  Clarendon. 
Yesterday,  being  Sunday  the  31st,  I  went  to  St  John's 
(3iiirch,  and  heard  Mr  Hoare.  The  first  hjrmn  brought  the 
^^iUage  of  B.,  in  the  old  country,  to  my  mind,  ancient  and 
inodaii,  "  Thy  will  be  done,"  the  most  beautiful,  I  have 


236  MR  HOARES  PREACHING. 

always  thought,  in  the  book.     This  churchy  St  John^s,  of 
stone,  like  the  church  at  Nelson,  is  long  and  narrow,  ^^  como 
el  alma  del  Biscaino" — like  the  soul  of  the  Biscayan;  the 
tail  of  it  below  the  font  is  appropriated  to  stragglers  and 
strangers.     You  can  hear  in  St  John's  from  the  free  seats 
something  of  what  the  preacher  is  saying ;  at  Nelson  you 
could  hear  nothing,  and  in  so  far  it  is  better  than  the  Nelson 
church;  neither  have  you  a  notice  staring  you  in  the  face 
as  you  have  at  Nelson,  addressed  to  the  free-seat  sitters, 
stating   that  the  churchwardens  will  turn  you  out  if  yon 
should  be  heard  to  laugh  or  make  a  noise  I     On  reading  this 
notice  it  occurred  to  me,  the  clergyman  and  the  church- 
wardens might  be  aware  there  was  something  ludicrous  in 
the  manner  of  performing  the  service.     In  the  evening  I 
went  again  to  hear  Mr  Hoare.     He  speaks  very  plainly  to 
his  congregation ;  he  told  them  that  the  church  had  now  been 
open  for  five  years,  and  that  he  did  not  think,  though  the 
church  was  well  filled,  that  he  had  ever  during  all  that  time 
seen  twenty-five  persons  in  it  who  had  come  there  to  worship, 
or  who  joined  in  the  responses,  and  he  evidently  set  down 
those  only  as  worshippers  who  joined  in  the  responses,  the 
loudest  of  course  being  the  most  devout    It  may  be  doubted 
if  the  test  he  applied  be  a  good  one.     The  whole  service  is 
chanted,  and  the  music  very  good.     He  told  his  congr^* 
tion  he  would  give  up  the  chanting  if  they  desired  it — indeed, 
that  he  was  ready  to  make  any  alteration  in  the  manner  of 
performing   the   service    the   majority  of  the    congregation 
desired.     He  bluntly  accused  his  hearers  of  attending  his 
church  because  it  was  considered  in  Christchurch  to  be  the 
fashionable  church.      He  oficred  to  teach  his  hearers  how 
they  might  join  in  chanting  the  responses,  if  they  would 
come  to  church  one  day  in  the  middle  of  the  week.    Hr 
Hoare  is  no  doubt  a  very  earnest  man,  but  as  I  walked  out 
of  church  after  listening  very  attentively  to  all  he  said — and 
I  heard  it  all,  for  I  was  not  in  the  free  seats — I  made  up  my 
mind  that  his  was  not  the  sort  of  preaching  that  was  likely 
to  do  much  good.     Bullying  does  not  do,  either  in  the  puljHt 
or  anywhere  else. 

When  we  were  at  anchor  ^t  Pictou  there  was  a  grand  dis- 
play of  Aurora  Australis,  of  the  deepest  rose-colour,  such  as 


.  MUSEUM-^PUBLIC  GARDENS— MOA.  237 

I  had  only  once  before  seen  in  the  Aurora  Borealis ;  it  lasted 
for  many  honrs  on  the  night  of  24tb  inst. 

Not.  \st. — I  visited  the  Museum,  the  Public  Gardens,  and 
what  are  called  the  Acclimatisation  Qtirdens.     On  entering 
these  latter  I  found  the  superintendent  busily  engaged   in 
extracting  from  some  very  offensive  garbage  maggots  to  feed 
lome  young  trout  not  very  long  hatched.      I  went  with  him 
to  see  the  operation.    The  youngest  trout  were  in  some  small 
boxes,  forming  steps  one  above  another,  the  bottoms  of  which 
were  covered  with  a  thick  layer  of  rough  gravel,  and  into 
these  boxes  was  introduced  a  stream  of  water,  passing  from 
box  to  box,  running  through  the  whole  number,  and  form- 
ing a  pool  underneath.     Some  of  these  trout  were  nearly  six 
weeks  old,  and  were  a  little  over  an  inch  long,  whilst  others 
were  very  much  smaller.    They  attacked  the  maggots  greedily. 
The  superintendent  told  me  they  grew  very  fast  when  fed 
upon  maggots  in  addition  to  anything  else  they  could  find 
for  themselvelB  in  the  water.     These,  he  told  me^  were  the 
first  fish  that  had  been  hatched  from  the  ovum  of  trout, 
hatched  and  reared  in  a  pond  in  the  garden,  from  ovum 
brought  from  Tasmania.    In  the  pool  under  the  boxes  there 
were  a  great  many,  and  in  the  pond  I  saw  one  a  foot  long, 
two  and  a  half  years  old.     The  Avon,  a  river  from  ten  to 
twenty  yards  broad,  runs  through  the  gardens,  and  some 
hondreds  of  trout  have  been  put  into  it,  and  are  supposed  to 
be  doing  well,  although  it  is  not  quite  certain  that  many  of 
them  may  not  have  fallen  a  prey  to  the  eels  that  abouud  in 
the  river.     The  Public  Gardens  are  adjoining  the  Acclima- 
tisation Ghurdens :  it  is  an  establishment  of  only  some  eight 
or  ten  years,  but  from  the  growth  of  the  plauts  it  would 
seem  to  be  very  much  older.     Everything,  or  nearly  every- 
thing, in  these  gardens  is  foreign,  and  principally  from  Eng- 
hmd,  and  do  remarkably  well ;  there  are  eighty  acres,  and 
the  soil  is  light  and  sandy.    The  Museum,  which  is  situated 
in  the  gardens,  is  a  new  stone  buildings  just  opened,  and 
eontains  shells,  minerals,  and  geological  specimens,  more 
particularly  illustrative  of  New  Zealand  productions.     There 
is  also  a  collection  of  birds  and  animals,  and  several  skele- 
tons of  extinct  birds,  among  which  is  a  moa,  ten  feet  high. 
It  is  a  creditable  establishment  for   Christchurch,  but  too 


238      RIVER  HEATHCOTT— PREPARING  FLAX. 

small,  I  should  think,  fof  it  is  pretty  full  already.  The 
bones  of  a  moa,  not  a  complete  skeleton,  were  lying  abont 
the  floor,  and  it  is  said  the  bird,  when  alive,  mnst  have  stood 
fourteen  feet  high. 

Zd. — Yesterday  I  took  a  ramble  hardly  into  the  oonntiy, 
but  at  any  rate  out  of  Christchurch,  about  three  miles. 
There  T  came  upon  a  craft  discharging  timber :  I  shonld  as 
soon  have  thought  of  seeing  a  live  moa.    On  inquiry  I  found 
she  was  on  a  little  river  called  the  Heathcott^  and  had  come 
up  from  the  Bay  of  Akalon,  distant  by  the  river,  with  all  its 
twists  and  turns,  about  twenty-five  miles.     This  craft  wis 
not  above  thirty  tons,  but  the  skipper  told  me  he  had  been 
up  in  a  vessel  of  one  hundred  and  eighty  tons.     At  the 
point  where  she  was  discharging  was  the  end  of  the  navi- 
gable part  of  the  river.     A  little  further  on  I  found  some 
men  washing  what  they  called  skin  wool.   The  wool  was  first 
put  into  a  large  wooden  box,  and  there  washed  with  soq> 
and  hot  water.    The  soap  was  used  principally  to  get  the 
grease  out  of  the  wool.    From  this  box  it  was  put  into  large 
buckets  and  washed  in  the  river.     Still  further  on  I  found 
a  flax-mill  at  work  driven  by  steam,  that  is,  crushing  New 
Zealand  flax.     The  long  flags  were  passed  once  through  be* 
tween  a  pair  of  small  rollers,  and  then  carried  to  a  man  who 
stood  on  a  board  across  a  running  stream,  who  washed  them, 
and  immediately  afterwards  they  were  taken  away  by  another 
hand  and  spread  upon  a  grass  field  to  dry.     This  diying 
operation  generally  consumed  two  or  three  weeks,  and  the 
flax  was  then  brought  back  to  a  mill,  and  after  undeigoing 
the  double  operation  of  scratching  and  hacking,  was  con- 
sidered fit  for  making  cordage.    The  man  who  was  employed 
in  washing  told  me  that  the  greater  part  of  the  flax  found 
growing  in  the  neighbourhood   of  Christchurch  had  been 
cut,  and  would  not  be  fit  to  cut  again  in  less  than  three 
years.     They  found,  he  told  me,  a  much  better  market  &r 
the  prepared  article  in  New  Zealand  for  making  cordage  than 
in  England.    This  man  had  been  two  years  in  New  Zealand; 
he  had  been  a  clerk  in  the  Great  Western  RaQway  Office  at 
Paddington,  and  on  arriving  here  and  finding  nothing  to  do 
in  the  way  of  quill-driving,  he  had  stripped  off  his  coat,  and 
was  now  earning  by  the  sweat  of  his  brow  6s.  a  day^  and  was 


EMIGRANTS— RATE  OF  WAGES.  939 

• 

putting  by  money ;  for  his  board  and  lodging  cost  him  only 
IOb.  a  week. 

The  Merope  arrived  from  London  a  few  days  ago, 
bringing  some  260  emigrants — seventy  girls,  forty  young 
men,  and  thirty-one  families.  The  whole  of  them  found  im- 
mediate employment  at  the  following  rates  :  Families,  with 
ratioDB,  £40  to  £50  a  year,  and  without  rations  30s.  a  week. 
Single  men,  £20,  and  rations  for  six  months ;  boys,  2s.  6d. 
to  8a.  6d.  a  week,  and  rations.  Female  domestic  servants 
—cooks,  £25;  general  servants,  £16  to  £25;  housemaids, 
£15  to  £20,  all  with  board  and  lodging.  On  talking  to  the 
bead-waiter  in  the  hotel  about  the  rates  of  wages  obtained 
bj  these  female  servants  by  the  Merope^  he  said  the  wages 
were  very  low,  and  that  they  would  not  remain  over  a  week 
or  two  at  such  rates.  The  girls  in  the  hotel,  of  whom  there 
moat  be  a  dozen  at  least,  get  from  £20  to  £30,  and  of 
oonrse  live  in  the  hotel. 

Christcharch  is  well  supplied  with  water.  The  evening 
of  my  arrival,  I  was  surprised  to  see  the  water  running  to 
waste  in  a  dozen  different  parts  of  the  town  from  upright  two- 
inch  iron  pipes,  most  of  them  with  taps,  and  I  thought  it 
strange,  seeing,  as  I  believed,  the  water  could  only  be  had 
from  the  nearest  range  of  hills,  which  is  at  a  considerable 
distance  from  the  town.  I  found,  however,  on  inquiry,  that 
every  one  of  these  iron  pipes  represented  an  Artesian  well, 
the  water  coming  from  a  depth  varying  from  20  to  200  feet 
Anywhere  in  the  neighbourhood  water  is  certain  to  be  found 
within  those  limits.  The  pipes  are  driven  down  after  the 
iSMhion  of  the  Abyssinian  wells,  but  it  happens  that  the  plan 
of  driving  the  pipes  was  in  practice  here  long  before  the 
Abyssinian  war  was  thought  o£ 

Instead  of  having  the  lower  end  of  the  first  pipe  driven, 
pierced  with  small  holes  to  admit  the  water  when  reached,  as 
I  have  seen  practised  in  England,  the  end  of  the  first  pipe 
here  is  plugged  with  a  piece  of  wood  in  the  shape  of  a  boy's 
ic^  point  downwards ;  and  when  water  is  reached,  which  it 
seems  the  workmen  can  tell  by  placing  the  ear  to  the  pipe, 
a  sort  of  iron  chisel,  in  lengths  screwed  together,  is  let  down 
on  the  inside  of  the  pipe  until  the  plug  is  reached,  and  with 
the  chisel  the  plug  is  split  and  driven  out,  and  the  water  of 


240         ARTESIAN  WELLS—SOUTHERN  ALPS. 

course  rises.  The  water  does  not  rise  everywhere  to  a  uni* 
form  height,  but  by  partially  closing  with  the  fingers  some 
of  the  two-inch  pipes,  I  have  seen  the  water  driven  up  to 
a  height  of  fourteen  or  fifteen  feet.  The  two-inch  pipes,  and 
there  are  some  of  even  three  or  four  inches,  stand  generally 
about  five  feet  above  the  ground.  I  left  Christchorch  on 
the  morning  of  the  4th  by  the  mail,  drawn  by  four  horses, 
for  Hokitika.  I  had  the  box-seat.  The  weather  was  fine, 
and  the  atmosphere  so  clear  that  it  seemed  as  if  a  man  with 
a  good  long  arm  could  have  placed  his  hand  on  the  snowy 
ridge  of  mountains  called  the  Southern  Alps,  extending^  in  a 
long  line  right  across  our  path  ;  for  although  our  road  took  as 
in  a  straight  line  to  them,  for'we  drove  right  at  them,  it  took 
us  seven  hours  to  reach  the  lower  snowless  ridge  that  extendi 
along  the  foot  of  the  snow-clad  higher  ridge,  distant  from 
Christchurch  fifty  miles.  After  this,  the  mountains  closed 
upon  us,  as  we  kept  rising  gradually  until  we  reached  3200  feet 
at  Porter's  Pass.  The  first  fifty  miles,  on  leaving  Christ- 
church,  was  over  the  Canterbury  plains,  apparently  a  dead 
level,  though  not  so  in  reality,  but  the  rise  is  so  gradual 
that  it  is  imperceptible. 

For  some  miles  out  of  Christchurch  the  laud  is  enclosed, 
and  the  road  runs  between  hedges  principally  of  English 
gorsc,  now  fiowering  gloriously,  and  scenting  the  air  with 
its  perfume.     The  remainder  of  the  fifty  miles  was  an  open 
treeless  plain,  covered  with  bunchy  long  grass,  over  which 
we  drove  here  and  there  and  everywhere  without  confining 
ourselves  to  any  particular  line  of  beaten  road.     The  whole 
of  the  fifty  miles  is  occupied  by  farms  and  sheep-runs.    Leav- 
ing the  plain,  our  road  continued  for  twenty-five  miles  through 
a  thoroughly  alpine  country,  the  treeless  hills,  among  which 
we  sped  our  way  over  a  good  road,  rising  to  a  height  of  firom 
1000  to  6000  feet,  and  presenting  a  great  diversity  of  scenery. 
In  this  stretch  we  passed  three  lakes,  picturesquely  situated 
at  the  foot  of  almost  perpendicular  mountains,  containing, 
however,  no  other  fish  than  eels,  some  of  which,  they  say, 
have  been  caught  weighing  ninety  pounds.     In  one  of  the 
lakes,  Pearson    the  coachman  averred  he  had  often  seen 
them  in  warm  sunny  weather  basking  on  the  shore,  and  tbifc 
they  quietly  ^^  skedaddled  "  into  the  water  as  the  coach  ap- 


LAKES— EELSSOKITIKA  TO  CHRISTCHURCH.  241 

proached.  In  another  of  these  lakes,  Grassmere,  the  story 
goes  that  there  is  a  monstrous  eel  which  has  defied  all  attempts 
to  captm^  it,  though  it  has  been  constantly  seen  for  years  past, 
so  large  that  they  set  it  down  as  weighing  400  pounds  I  So 
that  if  nature  has  not  been  very  bountiful  in  supplying  the 
lakes  and  rivers  of  New  Zealand  with  a  variety  of  fish,  she 
at  least  cannot  be  charged  with  parsimony  in  stocking  them 
with  good  large  eels,  for  they  abound  everywhere.  Besides 
eels,  the  only  fish  here  are  a  bull-trout,  scarce  and  never 
eaten  by  foreigners,  and  whitebait,  which  is  very  abundant 
in  the  rivers  and  in  the  sea.  We  reached  Cass,  seventy-six 
miles  from  Christchurch,  at  6  p.m.,  and  remained  there  until 
early  next  morning.  This  is  the  half-way  house  between 
Christchurch  and  Hokitika.  We  waited  for  the  mail  to  come 
in  from  Hokitika  until  eight  o'clock  before  we  sat  down  to 
sapper,  but  it  did  not  make  its  appearance.  At  nine  I  went 
to  bed  in  a  room  in  which  there  were  two  beds,  and  was  soon 
fast  asleep.  An  hour  afterwards  the  landlord  knocked  me 
up  to  admit  another  traveller ;  the  mail  had  arrived  quite 
fall,  so  there  was  an  occupant  provided  for  every  bed  in  the 
house.  I  wished  the  landlord  and  the  traveller  both  at  the 
d 1,  though  I  did  not  venture  to  tell  them  so.  At  day- 
light I  was  up,  and  had  the  first  turn  at  the  washhand-staud, 
and  when  my  '^  chum "'  turned  out,  I  told  him  he  would  have 
to  get  some  more  water.  He  hesitated  for  a  moment,  and  then 
commenced  washing  himself  in  the  water  that  held  a  fair 
amoant  of  dirt  from  my  skin,  saying,  *'  Oh,  this  water  will 
do  very  well ;  you  have  not  made  it  very  dirty  1 "  Every  man 
to  his  liking,  thought  I,  as  the  old  woman  said  when  she  kissed 
her  cow.  At  5  A.M.  we  were  on  the  road  again,  which  led  us 
now  among  higher  mountains  clothed  with  trees,  principally 
the  beech,  called  by  our  countrymen  here  birch,  which  perhaps 
it  is  more  like  than  it  is  like  our  English  beech.  The  hills 
nearest  to  us  had  but  little  snow  on  them,  whilst  those  at 
the  back  were  covered  well  down  the  sides.  We  passed 
through  one  very  narrow  dark  glen  with  vertical  hills  on 
both  sides,  and  then  onwards  through  a  great  diversity  of 
mountain  scenery  until  we  again  reached  8000  feet  in  height, 
having  lowered  our  altitude  between  Porter's  Pass  and  Cass 
1000  feet.     From  this  point  we  descended  the  Otira  Gorge, 


242  ffOKITIKA— SOUTHERN  ALPS. 

a  precipitous  descent  of  three  miles,  yarying  in  width  from 
20  to  100  yards,  with  a  noisy  torrent  rushing  down  on 
one  side  of  it  in  all  its  extent,  and  numerous  waterfalls 
streaming  down  the  well-wooded  and  precipitous  mountain- 
side, presenting  a  beautiful  spectacle  as  they  wended  their 
way  among  the  trees  they  encountered  in  all  their  oouise. 
This  gorge  is  cut  through  among  the  very  highest  of  tiiese 
Southern  Alps,  reaching  to  an  elevation,  some  of  the  peaks, 
of  perhaps  9000  feet.  This  mountain  scenery  is  very  grand, 
and  the  interest  of  it  greatly  heightened  by  the  numerous 
turns  and  twists  of  the  gorge.  I  thought  at  the  time  I  had 
never  seen  any  mountain  scenery,  taken  as  a  whole,  that 
pleased  me  more  than  these  Southern  Alps,  the  whole  extent, 
from  where  you  leave  the  plains  until  you  get  pretty  well 
out  on  the  western  side,  reaching  to  about  fifty  miles. 
Clear  of  the  mountains,  the  road  runs  through  a  rolling  coun- 
try, both  sides  lined  by  a  densely-tangled  forest,  in  which 
there  is  some  very  fine  large  timber,  and  a  great  variety 
of  it,  most  of  the  trees  clutched,  as  it  were,  in  the  folds 
of  enormous  climbers.  Barring  the  immediate  vicinity  of 
the  rivers  one  meets  with,  the  forest  scenery  continues  the 
whole  way  to  Hokitika,  and  makes  an -exceedingly  pretty 
drive  of  some  twenty-five  miles,  for  the  road  is  as  good  as 
any  turnpike  in  England. 

This  west  coast  has  not  a  single  tolerable  harbour  in  all 
its  length,  and  was  therefore  a  sealed  book  to  Europeans, 
until  the  gold  rush  towards  it  took  place  five  years  ago. 
Hokitika  now  may  have  a  population  of  4000,  and,  with  the 
mining  districts  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  there  may 
be  a  popuhition  of  6000  in  all.  To  supply  this  population 
with  spirits,  wine,  and  beer,  there  are  in  the  town  of 
Hokitika  alone,  in  one  street  principally,  171  public-houses. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  bulk  of  the  gold  produced 
at  the  diggings  is  bartered  away  for  drink  by  the  hard- 
working men  who  find  it. 

To-day  I  have  had  a  trip  to  Stafford,  and  to  the  Waimea 
diggings.  To  the  first  place  I  had  the  advantage  of  a  tram- 
way, and  to  arrive  at  the  latter  I  had  to  walk  a  couple  of 
miles  after  reaching  Stafford,  about  twelve  miles  from 
Hokitika.     The  tramway  for  the  first  five  miles  keeps  along 


WAIMEA— IRISHWOMAN.  243 

the  beach,  and  then  turns  a  little  inland  for  the  remainder 
of  the  journey.  We  have  come  through  a  tangled  forest, 
almost  tropical  in  appearance,  so  many  and  such  huge 
climbers  abound  in  it  There  is  also  some  fine  timber,  the 
red  and  the  white  pine  attaining  a  diameter  of  six  or  eight 
feet,  and  occasionally,  I  daresay,  even  more.  Stafford  is  a 
miner's  town,  of  wooden  huts  ;  even  the  branch  banks,  which 
haye  followed  the  gold-diggers  from  Hokitika,  are  very  small 
wooden  buildings.  As  I  emerged  from  Stafford,  facing  for 
the  .Waimea,  I  asked  a  robust  Irishwoman  whom  I  encoun- 
tered, how  long  it  would  take  me  to  walk  to  the  Waimea  ? 
She  replied,  "  That  *  dipinds '  upon  how  long  you  stop  on  the 
road."  "  But,"  I  said,  "  I  don't  intend  to  stop  on  the  road 
at  all,  but  go  right  through."  "  Oh,  then  in  that  case  it  will 
take  70a,"  she  said,  '^  twenty  minutes."  I  asked,  what  was 
the  distauce?  She  replied,  "  Two  miles."  "  Then,"  I  said, 
"  I  can't  walk  it  in  twenty  minutes,  for  that  would  be  at  the 
rate  of  six  miles  an  hour."  **  Oh,  faith,"  she  replied,  ^*  I 
can  walk  it  in  twenty  minutes,  and  you  ought  to  be  able  to 
do  80  too."  So  after  that  away  I  went,  and  although  I 
stepped  out,  putting  my  best  leg  foremost,  it  took  me  over 
half  an  hour  to  reach  my  destination. 

At  the  Waimea  the  diggings  are  met  with  in  all  directions 
around  the  town.  The  whole  region  has  evidently  been  at 
some  time  or  other  covered  with  water,  probably  the  bed  of 
a  river.  It  consists  of  small  boulders,  and  sometimes  big 
ones  are  met  with,  gravel  and  mud.  The  washing  of  this 
conglomerate  is  accomplished  by  directing  a  strong  stream 
of  water  upon  it  through  a  hose,  and  which  is  supposed  to 
carry  away  with  it  all  the  gold  contaiued  in  the  mass.  The 
stream  passes  on  and  enters  a  wooden  shoot,  which  may  be 
fifty  feet  long  or  more,  the  upper  end  for  some  twenty  feet 
perhaps  has  a  bottom  of  three-inch  plank  thickly  perforated 
with  one-and-a-half-inch  auger-holes.  In  passing  over 
these  holes  the  stream  deposits  in  them  all  the  gold  it  con- 
tains ;  or  if  any  very  small  particles  of  the  precious  metal 
should  escape  into  the  stream  after  it  has  passed  through  the 
whole  length  of  the  shoot,  they  are  intercepted  by  a  bed  of 
atones  and  gravel  placed  at  the  extremity  of  the  shoot  These 
bottoms  are  removed  every  two  or  three  weeks,  and  the  gold 


244  CANAR  Y  DIGGINGS^  WA  TER-RA  CE. 

collected.  The  process  is  yery  simple,  sod  oertainlj  very  rough 
and  ready.  One  claim  I  visited,  worked  by  four  men,  pro- 
dncedy  they  told  me,  from  £16  to  £30  worth  of  gold  a  week; 
and  another  claim,  worked  by  Italians,  produced  sufficient 
gold  to  give  each  man  four  pounds  a  week,  clear  of  all  work- 
ing expenses.  The  work  done  here  at  present  is,  bowever, 
but  a  mere  trifle  compared  with  what  was  done  five  years 
ago,  when  the  rush  brought  thousands  of  miners  from  other 
districts :  where  there  were  thousands  then,  now  tbere  are 
but  a  few  hundreds.  The  water  required  by  these  miners  is 
principally  supplied  by  companies,  who  invest  in  wbat  they 
call  a  race ;  that  is,  a  line  of  wooden  shooting  conducting 
the  water  from  some  source  among  the  hills,  of  sufficient 
elevation  and  sufficiently  abundant  for  the  purpose.  These 
sort  of  investments  are  never  made  unless  witb  the  almost 
certainty  of  getting  back  the  amount  expended  in  eighteen 
mouths,  for  it  is  considered  imprudent  to  calculate  on  the 
diggings  in  any  particular  locality  lasting  a  longer  time. 

8M. — Yesterday  1  walked  out  three  miles  to  the  Canary 
diggings,  situated  in  the  opposite  direction  from  Hokitika 
to  those  I  visited  to-day.  At  the  Canary  diggings  they  are 
working  over  again  earth  which  has  already  onoe  before 
undergone  the  operation,  the  present  produce  giving  from 
£2  to  £5  a  week  wages.  Here  the  gold-bearing  earth 
is  in  a  sort  of  great  quarry,  the  bottom  of  whicb  is  some 
sixty  to  eighty  feet  below  the  surface.  To  a  point  on  the 
surface  a  strong  stream  of  water  is  brought  by  means  of 
shooting  from  a  considerable  elevation  in  the  adjoining  hiUs. 
This  stream  turns  a  wheel  at  one  working  I  visited  (the 
Great  Western)  forty-five  feet  in  diameter,  and  at  another, 
close  by  (the  Victoria),  a  wheel  of  fifty  feet  in  diameter. 
By  means  of  these  wheels  the  earth  is  drawn  up  an  inclined 
plane  in  trucks  holding  half  a  ton  each  to  the  spot  where  it 
is  emptied  into  a  shoot,  and  thence  washed  down  into  an 
iron  cradle  placed  immediately  underneath,  perforated  with 
holes  two  inches  in  diameter,  and  which  is  kept  in  a  con- 
stant jogging  motion,  the  earth  remaining  in  the  cradle 
sufficiently  long  to  have  the  gold  it  may  contain  washed  ont 
of  it,  and  which  of  necessity  falls  down  through  the  holes  in 
the  bottom  of  the  cradle,  and  from  thence  into  a  box  under- 


CANAR  Y  DIGGINGS.  245 

neath.  At  the  Great  Western  about  150  tons  dirt  is 
washed  daily,  working  from  7  a. m.  to  5  p.m.  There  are 
only  seven  men  forming  this  company,  and  they  seemed  to 
me  to  be  doing  very  hard  work.  The  man  attending  to 
receiving  and  emptying  the  trucks  is  a  Scotchman,  a  fine 
stalwart  fellow  from  Dumbartonshire  ;  indeed,  all  the  men  I 
saw  at  the  Canary  diggings  were  Scotch.  This  man,  with 
whom  I  conversed  for  a  long  time  as  he  proceeded  with  his 
work,  was  a  simple-rminded  Christian,  and  one  who  evidently 
thought  a  good  deal  about  his  soul.  He  had  been  reading 
lately  some  of  the  Plymouth  Brethren  tracts,  which  had 
made  some  impression  upon  him,  and  he  asked  me  what  I 
thought  of  the  sect  It  was  but  little  known,  he  said,  when 
he  left  home.  Nothing  would  surprise  me  less  than  that 
man  should  some  day  leave  the  Church  of  his  forefathers 
and  join  that  of  the  Plymouth  Brethren.  When  the  dinner 
hour  arrived  (noon),  and  the  work  was  suspended  for  an  hour, 
I  accompanied  my  friend  to  his  wooden  hut,  and  he  gave  me 
a  piece  of  jade  or  greenstone  which  had  been  found  in  the 
workings,  a  common  occurrence  in  this  district.  The  over- 
seer or  manager  at  the  Victoria  diggings,  which  is  worked 
by  a  company  of  forty  miners,  also  gave  me  a  piece  of  jade. 
^HuB  jade  is  a  very  close-grained  hard  stone,  much  used  by 
the  Maories  for  making  weapons  of  war  and  farming  imple- 
ments before  iron  came  within  their  reach,  and  as  it  takes  a 
high  polish,  it  is  also  worked  up  to  a  considerable  extent  by 
and  for  them  in  the  present  day  into  ornaments  for  per- 
sonal wear.  It  does  not  seem  to  be  found  at  all  in  the 
Waimea  district,  and  I  don't  learn  that  it  has  ever  been 
found  in  the  Canary  district  otherwise  than  in  isolated 
pieces  among  the  gold-bearing  dirt  The  manager  pressed 
me  to  stop  and  partake  of  his  mid -day  meal,  tea  and  bread 
and  butter,  of  which  there  seemed  to  be  a  plentiful  supply 
upon  the  table,  but  I  was  in  a  hurry  to  get  back  to  Hoki- 
tUca,  and  I  declined.  The  diggings  here  are  kept  free  from 
water  by  the  use  of  the  Califomian  pump,  worked  by  the 
big  water-wheel  that  draws  up  the  trucks  of  dirt,  and  by 
means  of  which  the  gold  is  afterwards  washed  out  of  it 
This  Califomian  pump,  as  it  is  called,  is  a  very  simple  con- 
trivance for  drawing  water  from  the  diggings,  and  it  was  first 


246       TIMBER^RETURN  TO  CHRISTCHURCH. 

introduced  by  some  Chinamen  into  the  Californian  diggings, 
where  it  is  now  used  extensively.  The  road  to  the  Canary 
diggings  leads  along  by  the  shore  and  the  river  from  Hoki- 
tika,  with  a  good  deal  of  dense  tangled  forest  on  either  side 
of  it|  and  many  patches  of  cleared  and  half-cleared  groQDd, 
mixed  up  with  drinking  and  eating  houses  for  intercepting  a 
share  of  the  produce  of  the  gold  mines  before  it  reaches  the 
branch  banks  established  in  the  town  for  receiving  it 

The  useful  timber  in  these  forests  is  the  red  and  the  white 
pine,  but  the  former  is  a  much  more  durable  wood  than  the 
latter.  The  totora^  a  native  tree,  grows  to  a  great  size,  and 
so  does  a  beech-tree,  or  something  like  a  beech,  called  by 
foreigners  a  birch.  I  have  seen  the  red  pine  and  the  beech 
some  five  to  six  feet  in  diameter.  I  am  told  the  toiard 
reaches  twelve  feet  in  diameter  sometimes,  but  I  expect  that 
will  be  when  measured  close  down  to  the  ground.  The 
fuchsia  grows  into  a  good-sized  tree,  and  the  wood  of  it  is 
used,  by  cabinetmakers.  The  giant  tree-fern  abounds  here- 
abouts— ^many  of  them,  I  should  think,  full  thirty  feet  high. 
Water  is  an  expensive  item  for  the  miners  at  the  Canary  dig- 
gings; the  Great  Western  establishment  pays  £11  a  week, 
and  the  Victoria  £15.  There  are  only  some  five  or  six 
establishments  such  as  these  two  at  the  Canary  diggings, 
and  the  whole,  I  believe,  or  pretty  nearly  the  whole,  are  con- 
ducted on  the  same  principle,  what  they  call  here  the  co- 
operative system.  The  owners  of  the  water-race  seem  to 
have  the  best  investment  on  the  west  coast. 

11^^,  Christchurch. — At  Hokitika  I  awoke  on  Tuesday 
morning  at  4  a.m.  ;  it  was  raining  in  torrents,  and  had  been 
doing  so  all  night.  The  coach  was  to  start  for  Christchurch 
at  6  A.M.,  by  which,  before  I  turned  in,  I  had  arranged  to 
take  passage,  but  seeing  what  the  weather  was,  and  knowing 
what  it  had  been  all  night,  I  made  up  my  mind  to  wait  for 
the  next  coach,  for  I  was  quite  sure  that  the  rivers,  with  the 
weather  we  had  had,  would  be  too  much  swollen  for  the 
coach  to  pass ;  with  this  resolution  I  turned  from  the  light, 
and  went  o£f  fast  asleep.  At  half-past  five  the  boots  called 
and  said  the  coach  was  at  the  door,  and  so  quite  mechani- 
cally, forgetting  at  the  moment  the  resoluticm  I  had  come  to 
an  hour  before,said,  ^^  All  rightl "  turned  out,  and  dressed  forth- 


HOKITIKA  TO  CHRISTCHURCH.  247 

with*  Well,  bj  the  time  I  had  come  properly  to  my  senses, 
I  saw  that  I  was  doing  a  foolish  thing,  going  o£f  in  such 
weather  that  the  coach  would  have  to  return  from  the  first 
rlTer,  for  as  I  had  the  box-seat,  I  was  surely  in  for  a  wetting. 
The  coach,  carrying  the  mail,  was  of  necessity  obliged  to  start, 
and  make  the  attempt  to  proceed.  So  at  six  wc  were  ofi*, 
iDd  at  nine  we  were  back  again,  having  found  the  Arahura 
too  big  even  for  what  they  call  the  punt  to  be  brought  from 
the  opposite  side,  the  punt  being  a  conveyance  for  taking 
horses  and  carriages  across  the  river  when  .it  is  too  high  to 
be  forded.  These  rivers  on  the  west  coast  are  nearly  all 
moontain  torrents,  and  when  the  rain  subsides  they  fall  as 
lapidly  as  they  had  previously  risen.  At  six  the  next  morn- 
ing we  started  again  with  a  fairer  prospect ;  the  weather  had 
cleared  up  immediately  after  we  had  returned  from  the  river, 
and  now  the  morning  was  very  fine.  The  punt  took  us  across 
the  Arahura  all  right,  and  we  proceeded  on  without  obstacle, 
fording  several  streams  without  much  trouble  until  we  came 
to  the  Taipo ;  there  we  had  to  leave  our  carriage  and  to  pass 
the  river  on  a  tiny  suspension  bridge,  and  embark  in  another 
carriage,  which  we  found  ready  for  us.  There  was  another 
bridge  which  we  also  had  to  pass  over,  spanning  a  portion  of 
what  is  now  the  dry  bed  of  this  river.  It  would  seem  that 
the  engineers  of  New  Zealand  have  been  rather  unfortunate 
in  fixing  upon  the  proper  spot  for  throwing  bridges  over 
•hifting  streams ;  for  at  the  Selwin,  I  am  told,  they  made  a 
aimilar  mistake  in  building  a  railway  bridge,  and  had  conse- 
inently  to  erect  a  second  bridge,  the  first  being  useless. 
Soon  after  leaving  the  Taipo  we  met  the  coach  coming  from 
Christchurch,  with  which  we  exchanged  horses  and  driver^ 
iod  proceeded  on  to  Cass  Station,  where  we  arrived  at  9.30 
Ml.  Here  we  remained  until  1  A.H.,  when  we  got  underway 
>gaiD,  and  at  1  p.m.  we  reached  Christchurch,  having  been 
itpoQ  the  road  driving  twenty-nine  and  a  half  hours,  a  dis- 
tince  of  150  miles. 

13rt. — Paid  a  visit  to  a  farm  a  few  miles  out  of  Christchurch, 
<»nai8ting  of  200  acres,  all  of  which,  with  the  exception  of 
de?eQ  acres  under  barley,  oats,  and  mangolds,  is  laid  down 
^^  grass,  permanent  pasture,  from  English  seed.  There  waa 
OQe  field  of  fifty  acres  I  admired  very  much.     There  was  a 


248  FARM  A  T  CHRISTCHURCH. 

portion  of  the  200  acres,  but  a  small  portion,  mown  annnally, 
for  it  would  seem  the  fields  are  never  bare  of  pasture  here, 
unless  fed  down  very  hard  indeed.  I  saw  a  handsome  bull 
which  had  just  taken  a  first  prize  at  the  agricultural  show 
held  here,  and  three  handsome  young  bulls,  yearlings ;  one 
had  also  carried  off  a  first  prize  at  the  show.  I  saw  some 
fine  milch-cows  in  the  fifby-acre  paddock,  all  in  excellent 
condition,  indeed  quite  fit  for  the  butcher.  There  were  some 
handsome  rams  on  the  farm — one  had  taken  a  first  prize  at 
the  show — and  a  good-looking  flock  of  ewes  and  lambs,  the 
lambs  running  with  their  mothers  as  fat  as  butter.  The 
ewes,  after  the  lambs  have  been  taken  from  them,  and  got 
into  good  condition  (shorn,  of  course,  for  they  will  shear  ten 
pounds  wool),  may  realise  about  lis.  each,  their  weight 
being  about  twelve  stone.  The  price  usually  put  by  the 
butcher  on  fat  sheep,  when  buying,  is  l^d.  a  pound. 
Mutton  is  selling  here  now,  hind-quarters  at  2^,  and  1^ 
for  fore-quarters.  Beef  is  cheap  in  proportion.  A  hundred 
sheep  for  boiling  down  were  sold  off  this  farm  at  Is.  6d. 
each !  and  they  are  sometimes  sold  as  low  as  6d.  each  I  This 
ferm  is  worked  by  two  Scotchmen,  whose  joint  wages  amount 
to  £200  per  annum,  besides  which  they  have  milk  allowed 
them,  one  and  a  half  pounds  butter  each  a  week,  and  a  fat 
hog  once  a  year.  They  do  all  the  work  of  the  farm,  with  the 
exception  of  shearing  the  sheep,  and  this  costs  15s.  a  hundred 
They  rarely  have  anything  the  matter  with  their  sheep ;  one 
per  cent  wiU  cover  the  annual  loss.  The  owner  of  this  farm 
has  been  in  New  Zealand  twenty  years.  All  he  had  when 
he  made  up  his  mind  to  leave  home  was  a  couple  of  hundred 
pounds  and  a  young  wife.  He  spent  a  good  deal  of  what  he 
had  in  getting  out  here,  and  the  only  venture  he  brought 
was  a  barrel  .of  boots,  which  realised  him  a  large  profit  On 
arriving  at  Auckland,  he  had  the  forethought  to  have  made 
a  very  small  portable  wooden  house,  which  he  brought  to 
these  plains  and  erected  with  his  own  hands,  living  in  the 
meantime,  he  and  his  wife,  under  a  tent  That  was  twenty 
years  ago :  I  am  told  that  he  is  now  worth  £100,000,  and  a 
highly  respected  and  useful  member  of  society.  The  little 
house  he  brought  from  Auckland,  and  put  together  with  his 
own  hands,  is  still  standing  in  Christchurch.    This  gentle- 


CHRISTCHURCH.  249 

nan  is  now  liying  in  a  very  nice  house,  with  conservatory 
iind  greenhouse,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Christchurch,  with 
tome  fifteen  acres  of  paddock  and  pleasure-grounds  attached. 
In  one  corner  of  the  property  is  a  cottage  in  which  his  father 
ind  mother  are  living — ^he  brought  them  from  England  some 
fifteen  years  ago — the  one  is  eighty-four  years  of  age  and 
the  other  seventy-four. 

I  talked  with  several  of  the  men  stationed  along  the  road 
between  Christchurch  and  Hokitika  keeping  it  in  order  :  they 
don't  break  their  necks  by  hard  work,  that  is  quite  evident, 
ind  still  they  get  9s.  a  day  wages  on  the  west  end  of  the 
Totd,  and  8s.  on  the  Canterbury  end.  No  man  in  this  part 
of  the  world  makes  longer  hours  than  from  7  a.h.  to  5  p.m., 
vith  time  between  for  breakfast  and  dinner. 

The  town  of  Christchurch  is  situated  on  the  Canterbury 
plains,  seven  miles  from  the  port  of  Lyttleton,  with  which  it 
is  connected  by  a  railway  cut  through  Banks  Peninsula,  the 
tunnel  being  one  and  three-quarter  miles  long.  The  streets 
are  all  perfectly  straight  and  wide,  but  in  many  instances 
not  running  quite  at  right  angles  to  each  other.  The  major 
part  of  them  have  a  small  stream  of  water  running  through 
on  both  sides.  Indeed  the  water  supply  is  unequalled  by 
that  of  any  city  in  the  world,  for  almost  every  house  of  any 
iize  has  a  full  supply  of  the  very  best  of  water  from  an 
Artesian  well  of  its  own,  obtained  by  driving  iron  pipes  to  a 
depth  of  from  fifty  to  a  hundred  feet,  and  at  a  cost  of  from 
£6  to  £16.  Of  course  all  public  squares  and  places  from 
whence  the  streets  radiate  are  supplied  with  fountains  and 
basing,  at  which  the  carts  employed  in  watering  the  streets 
are  filled  by  means  of  a  smaJl  Californian  pump :  it  works 
well,  and  is  a  cheap  and  effective  contrivance.  In  some 
places  the  water  through  a  pipe  of  three-quarter-inch  bore 
•Cfewed  on  to  a  larger  pipe  would  rise  some  fifteen  or 
sixteen  feet,  but  the  greater  number  of  the  pipes  in  gardens 
•tand  about  five  feet  high,  with  a  rose  screwed  on  to  the  end ; 
^d  where  I  have  seen  open  pipes,  a  strong  stream  runs 
^▼er  usually  two-inoh  pipes. 

The  houses  are  principally  built  of  wood,  and  never  more 
flwin  two  stories.  Some  of  the  churches,  and  the  Government 
buildings,  as  well  as  the  banks  and  a  few  private  stores,  are 


250  CHRISTCHURCH— ARTESIAN  WELLS. 

of  stone.  St  John's  Church  is  a  very  creditable  edifice,  and 
the  hall  of  the  Provincial  Assembly,  though  small,  is  veiy 
handsomely  decorated  in  the  interior,  at  a  total  cost,  I 
am  told,  of  £10,000 ;  rather  an  unwise  outlay,  seeing  that 
many  people  think  the  affairs  of  the  provinces  will  soon  be 
managed  by  simple  municipal  institutions,  the  central  Grovem- 
ment  taking  to  itself  the  bulk  of  the  legislation  now 
emanating  from  the  provincial  assemblies. 

Evidently  the  engineers,  in  laying  out  the  city  of  Christ- 
church,  calculated  on  its  becoming  some  day  of  colossal 
dimensions,  and  did  their  work  accordingly.  The  streets  are 
wide  and  the  squares  numerous,  and  the  former  may  be  ex- 
tended to  any  required  length.  The  river  Avon  runs  through 
it,  a  river  varying  in  width  from  ten  to  twenty  yards,  and 
planted  to  a  considerable  distance  on  both  sides  with  the 
Australian  blue  gum-tree,  weeping-willows,  and  poplars. 
Whitebait  is  abundant  in  the  Avon,  and  boys  may  be  seen 
all  day  long  catching  them  in  hand-nets,  and  selling  them  at 
sixpence  a  quart.  Smelt  is  also  caught  in  this  river,  and 
occasionally  a  flounder  is  taken  in  it ;  eels  of  course  abound. 
The  river  runs  pure  and  clear,  no  sewage  being  allowed  to 
empty  into  it;  and  as  the  town  is  on  a  flat,  all  sewage 
matter  has  to  be  removed  in  carts,  which  is  done  everywhere 
once  a  fortnight,  and  in  some  way  or  other  without  creating 
any  nuisance  in  the  public  thoroughfares. 

Christchurch  is  only  some  twenty  feet  above  high-water 
mark.  With  regard  to  its  remarkable  supply  of  pure  water, 
I  am  told  that  in  and  very  closely  around  the  town  the 
stream  rises  from  five  to  fifteen  feet  above  the  surface  in  two- 
inch  pipes,  but  as  you  proceed  from  the  city  towards  the 
mountains,  the  ground  rising  a  little,  it  no  longer  hardly 
comes  to  the  surface.  The  first  water  was  obtained  by  a 
brewer  some  nine  or  ten  years  ago,  who  bored  for  the  chance 
of  finding  it,  and  it  was  some  time  before  any  other  attempts 
were  made.  At  last  a  blacksmith  thought  he  would  try,  and 
invented  the  driving  system,  instead  of  the  boring  system, 
which  had  been  practised  by  the  brewer.  The  blacksmith 
being  successful  at  a  depth  of  seventy  feet,  then  others  tried ; 
and  so,  long  before  the  Abyssinian  war  was  undertaken ,  there 
were  hundreds  of  these  wells  existing  in  ChristchurcL     An 


TIMAR  U—  OAMAR  U—D  UNEDIN.  25 1 

expenditure  of  from  £8  to  £10  secures  this  great  boon  in  any 
part  of  Christchurch  or  its  immediate  neighbourhood. 

On  the  15th  November  I  embarked  on  board  the  Tararua^ 
lound  for  Melbourne.  Our  first  halt  was  at  Timaru  after 
leaving  Lyttleton,  an  open  roadstead,  but  the  beach  was 
quiet,  and  we  had  no  difficulty  in  landing.  A  breakwater, 
pat  np  some  two  years  ago  of  ill-made  artificial  stone,  has 
been  completely  washed  away.  The  back  country  is  rich  in 
giain-producing  land,  and  in  sheep-runs  also ;  so  the  future  of 
Timaru  is  looked  forward  to  with  great  hope  by  the  present 
settlers.  It  is  but  the  skeleton  of  a  town  yet,  though  there 
are  a  few  good  shops  in  it;  population  about  1200. 

Oamaru,  the  next  place  we  stopped  at,  is  very  prettily 
aitaated  on  the  slope  of  a  hill ;  it  is  an  open  roadstead,  and 
the  beach  at  present  is  bad  for  the  discharge  or  loading  of 
carga     A   contract,  however,  has  been  entered  into  for  a 
breakwater  to  be  run  out  from  a  bluff  forming  the  southern 
boundary   of    the    port,  1400  feet,  the  stone    to   be  artifi- 
cud,  and  in  blocks  of  thirty  tons  each.     The  depth  of  water 
may  be  from  three  to  five  fathoms,   and    the    cost  of  the 
wwk  £28,000.     This  is  a  rising  town,  the  country  in  the 
Tidnity  being  rich  in  grain  and  wool.     Timaru  is  in  the  pro- 
vince of  Canterbury ;  Oamaru,  with  its  1500  inhabitants,  is 
in  the  province  of  Otago.     The  weather  was  rough  when  we 
arrived  in  the  roadstead,  and  we  lay  o£f  and  on  all  night, 
tnd  with  difficulty  next  morning  landed  what  cargo  we  had 
for  the  place,  and  took  on  board  some  grain  and  wool.     I 
did  not  land  here.     We  got  away  at  noon,  and  at  noon  the 
day  afterwards  we  anchored  at  Port  Chalmers,  a  commodious 
barboor,  and   immediately   afterwards   we   embarked    in  a 
river  steamer,  and  proceeded  forthwith  to   Dunedin,    nine 
niiles  distant,  to    which   place — the    capital  of  Otago — a 
nulway  is    now   being   constructed  from    Port    Chalmers. 
Donedin  is   the  most  populous   town  of  the  province,  and 
contains  13,000  inhabitants.     It  is  built  upon  a  belt  of  land 
kicked  up  by  hills  rising  to  an  elevation  of  600  feet,  and 
ninning  at  right  angles  to  the  bay,  from  which  the  town 
Presents   the  appearance  of  an   amphitheatre,   the   houses 
riaing  tier  above  tier  to  its  very  summit.     They  are  all,  or 
^  principal  part  of  them,  built  of  white  freestone,  easily 


252  PORT  CHALMER&-OTAGO. 

worked,  and  hardens  on  exposare  to  the  atmosphere.    Dan- 
edin  possesses  many  fine  public  edifices  and  private  honses, 
and  some  public  gardens  laid  out  about  a  year  ago  promise 
to  be  a  useful  and  pleasant  adjunct  to  the  city.     ThiB  pro- 
vince of  Otago  was  first  settled  in  1848,  and  owes  its  origin 
to  the  Scotch  Free  Church  Association,  the  first  band  of 
settlers    arriving  at  Port  Chalmers  in   March  1848.    The 
province  now  contains  some  50,000  inhabitants,  and  is  the 
most  populous  province  in  the  colony.     A  handsome  Presbj- 
terian  church  is  now  in  course  of  construction,  of  white  free- 
stone.  The  very  elevated  and  chaste  steeple  is  already  finished, 
though  the  body  of  the  church  is  not  yet  roofed  in.   The 
province   owes  its  rapid  increase  in  wealth  and  population 
greatly  to  its  extensive  and  rich  gold  mines,  discovered  in 
1861,  as  well  as  to  its  great  extent  of  fine  pastoral  and  agri- 
cultural land.     I  visited  the  Museum,  which  contains  littk 
beyond  a  collection  of  minerals  and  other  specimens  illnt- 
trative  of  the  geological  formation  of  the  province.     We  got 
away  from  Port  Chalmers  at  4  p.m.  on  the  18th,  and  at  six 
next  morning  steamed  into  the  ^^  Bluffs/'  where  we  landed 
some    cargo,  and    took  on  board  some  wooL     The  town  is 
comprised  of  half-a-dozen  houses.     There  is  a  railway  from 
it  to  the  town  of  Invercargill,  eighteen  miles  distant,  with 
only  one  train  a  day.     There  are  some  rich   gold  diggings 
in  the  neighbourhood.     At  Port  Chalmers  there  were  four 
vessels  waiting  for  cargoes  for  Europe,  but  at  the  "  Blufe" 
there  was  but  one  vessel,  the  Chile^  from  Liverpool,  laying 
outside  the  harbour,  waiting  for   a  fair  wind  to   enter  the 
port. 

I  found  on  the  beach  some  six  or  seven  different  sorts  of 
shells;  generally  in  New  Zealand  there  are  but  few  shells 
on  the  shores.  Invercargill  contains  2000  inhabitants.  At 
noon  (Saturday)  we  left  the  port  On  the  following  Thnis- 
day  (to-day,  the  24th)  we  arrived  at  Melbourne,  after  a 
tolerably  rough  passage. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

lUboone — Qeelong— Laanceston—Hobart  Town— Rail  and  tram  —  Sykes,  the 
Toriubireman— Van  Diemen^s  Land  Company— Forests— Penguin  silver  mine 
—Penguins — Good  lands  heavily  timbered — Hampshire  Hills — Walaby  steaks 
—Badgers— Hyenas — Surrev  Hills— Opossums— Kangaroos-Middlesex  Plains 
— Qad*s  Hill— Mersey — Rail  to  Launceston— Gold  mines  at  Nine-Mile  Springs 
—Industry  gold  mines — Raoecourse — Black  Boy  mines — Description  of  Hobart 
Town — Hobart,  Golden  Gate,  and  other  mines— Farming  depressed  in  Tasmania 
—Melbourne — Meat-curing  works— Railway — The  stinking  Yarra— Califomians 
dunild  have  Tasmania— Ballarat— Pay-dirt— Clunes  gold  mines— Stinking  fac- 
tories at  Melbourne —Vested  rights — Heavy  protection  duties — Sydney,  de- 
Kripiion  of— Newcastle  collieries — Paddy*8  Market  at  Melbourne — Launceston 
— Sailwaj  opened— £xcess  of  females  in  Tasmania— Bendigo  and  other 
digging* — Gaile. 

December  4th. — I  yesterday  paid  a  flying  visit  to  Ballarat 
It  is  a  large  and  growing  town,  wholly,  it  would  seem,  sup- 
ported by  its  rich  gold  alluvial  and  quartz-crushing  gold 
mineB  in  its  immediate  neighbourhood.  We  only  remained 
tliere  a  couple  of  hours,  so  I  shall  say  nothing  about  the 
place  until  I  have  seen  it  again  ;  but  Geelong  we  had  a  good 
look  at  It  is  a  prettily  situated  town,  on  the  shore,  almost 
it  the  entrance  of  the  great  bay  (Port  Philip,  within  the 
Heads)  upon  which  Melbourne  also  is  built.  For  awhile 
Geelong  was  the  rival  of  Melbourne,  and  promised  at  one 
time  to  be  whatj&lelbourne  is  now,  but  it  got  beaten  in  the 
ntoe,  and  whilst  its  competitor  has  made  gigantic  strides 
towards  wealth,  Geelong  has  gone  back,  and  house  property 
which  was  bought  for  £1800  fifteen  years  ago  is  now  not 
vonh  more  than  £300 ;  and  in  this  proportion  has  been  the 
^line  in  the  value  of  all  property,  land,  and  sites  for  build- 
^,  as  well  as  in  buildings  all  over  Geelong.  It  is  a  splendid 
port,  and  water  sufficient  for  the  largest  merchant  vessels, 
'lere  were  four  loading  wool  when  I  was  there.  There  are 
^e  capital  sea-bathing  establishments,  which  before  very 
^^iig  will  bring  many  people  to  Geelong  as  a  fashionable 
Catering-place.  Its  position,  too,  as  regards  Ballarat,  and 
^g  on  the  road,  to  a  large  extent,  of  sheep-runs,  cannot 


2S4     WILLI AMSTO  WN—TAMAR—LA  UNCESTON. 

fail  to  ensnre  to  it  some  progress,  notwithstanding  its  failure 
in  its  competition  with  Melbourne  for  the  first  place  iu 
Victoria  as  the  chief  of  commercial  cities. 

Visited  Williamstown,  which  may  be  called  part  of  Mel- 
bourne, lying  opposite  to  and  close  to  Sandridge.  All  large 
vessels  discharge  and  take  in  their  cargoes  at  one  or  other  of 
these  two  places,  there  not  being  water  enough  to  allow  of 
their  coming  up  the  river  closer  to  Melbourne.  Craft  drawing 
fourteen  or  fifteen  feet  water  come  up  at  high  tide,  which 
rises  only  some  two  or  three  feet  Several  fine  ships  were 
loading  wool  at  Williamstown,  and  *' dumping"  or  pressing 
the  bales,  after  coming  from  the  country,  into  smaller  com- 
pass by  steam  power,  going  on  in  stores  and  on  the  open 
wharf  close  to  the  shipping.  A  graving-dock  is  being  con- 
structed at  Williamstown  by  the  Government,  of  basalt, 
called  blue-stone  here,  thirteen  cubic  feet  to  the  ton.  Length 
of  the  dock  in  all,  480  feet ;  calculated  to  take  in  vessels  of 
400  feet  long ;  breadth,  above  ninety  feet,  and  fifty-five  feet 
in  the  bottom  ;  depth,  thirty-three  feet.  The  bottom  of  the 
dock  is  twenty-five  feet  below  the  bottom  of  the  harbour. 
Williamstown  is  nine  miles  from  Melbourne,  by  a  circuitous 
railway ;  as  the  crow  flies  it  is  only  three  and  a  half  miles. 

I  left  Melbourne  for  Launceston  in  the  steamer  Denoent 
at  10  A.M.  on  Monday,  and  arrived  there  on  the  6th,  twenty- 
four  and  a  half  hours  coming  276  miles.  Launceston  stands 
second  in  importance  among  the  towns  of  Tasmania,  Hobart 
Town  being  the  capital.  It  is  situated  at  the  head  of  the 
river  Tamar,  just  at  the  confluence  of  the  South  and  North 
Esk,  forty-five  miles  from  Bass's  Straits  (opposite  the 
southern  coast  of  Australia),  into  which  it  empties  itself. 
The  distance  across  the  straits  is  about  100  miles.  The 
Tamar  is  a  winding  river,  and  there  is  a  channel  in  it  deep 
enough  in  all  its  course  at  high  water  for  vessels  drawing 
fourteen  feet.  On  both  sides  the  country  is  hilly  and  clothed 
with  timber,  and  at  every  turn  of  the  river  very  eligible 
building  sites  present  themselves.  There  is  some  cleared  land, 
but  not  much,  and  some  comfortable-looking  farmhouses, 
and  a  gentleman's  country  seat  here  and  there.  I  am  told 
the  land  is  poor  on  both  sides  of  the  river.  The  town  itself 
is  prettily  situated,  and  regularly  built,  as  are  indeed  all 


LA  UNCESTON  POST-OFFICE.  255 

these  jonng  towns.  Two  small  vessels  were  loading  grain 
and  wool  for  London.  Between  Lannceston  and  Circular 
Head,  the  north-western  extremity  of  the  island,  two  little 
steamers  are  kept  constantly  running,  and  do  nearly  all  the 
coasting  work.  They  call,  after  leaving  Georgetown,  a  port 
on  the  Tamar  inside  the  Heads,  at  Port  Sorrell,  the  Leven, 
the  Mersey,  the  Forth,  the  Penguin,  Emu  Bay,  and  at  Table 
Cape;  with  the  exception  of  the  Penguin  and  Emu  Bay, 
all  the  other  places  are  the  mouths  of  rivers,  being  navigable 
for  a  few  miles  only  for  small  craft,  except  the  Mersey,  in 
which  there  is  seven  to  eight  feet  water  at  high  tide  for  seven 
miles  from  its  mouth.  A  railway  from  Launceston,  forty 
miles  to  Deloraine,  is  about  to  be  opened,  and  a  tramway 
from  the  latter  place  to  the  Mersey  is  in  course  of  construe^ 
tion. 

Soon  after  I  arrived  at  Launceston  I  went  to  the  post- 
office,  thinking  that  there,  if  anywhere,  I  might  find  some 
one  capable  of  deciphering  the  address  sent  to  me  from  Eng- 
land of  a  man  whom  I  had  helped  to  send  to  this  colony 
many  years  ago,  but  the  post-office  officials  were  inadequate 
to  the  task.  This  morning,  when  I  came  down  to  the  wharf 
to  embark  for  Circular  Head,  whilst  waiting  on  the  wharf 
for  the  time  of  starting  to  arrive,  a  little  man  sidled  up  to 
me  and  said,  "  Going  to  the  Mersey,  sir?"  "  lam,"  I  said, 
"and  I  am 'not;  I  am  going  further  afield — ^to  Circular 
Head."  ^^  My  name,  sir,  is  Lyons.  I  keep  an  inn  at  the 
Mersey,  where  you  will  find  comfortable  quarters  had  you 
been  going  there ;  my  son  will  be  a  passenger  with  you  in 
the  boat."  Forthwith  I  entered  into  conversation  with  the 
little  man  ;  many  people  began  to  gather  about  our  little 
steamer,  the  Pioneery  some  to  proceed  on  in  her,  others,  their 
friends,  came  to  see  them  ofil  Everybody  who  approached 
seemed  on  the  best  of  terms  with  my  new  acquaintance ;  and 
it  bethought  me,  seeing  that  they  were  every  one  of  them 
people  who  seemed  to  know  all  about  Tasmania,  to  produce 
my  unintelligible  address,  and  to  try  if  any  of  them  were 
equal  to  the  task  which  had  been  found  too  difficult  even 
for  the  post-office  people.  Several  confessed  their  inability 
to  read  the  writing  of  D.'s  correspondent  at  B.,  and  I 
had  all  but  put  back  the  troublesome  address  into  my  pocket, 


2S6      YORKSHIREMAN^PIONEER  STEAMER. 

when  a  sharp  Yorkshireman  appeared  upon  the  scene.  Now 
or  never^  I  thought;  this  is  my  last  chance.  The  H.  D., 
South  Banks,  Tasmania,  was  intelligible  enough ;  bat  there 
was  another  word,  the  key  to  the  whole  address,  between 
South  Banks  and  Tasmania,  which  had  puzzled  us  alL  We 
had  made  it  out  to  be  Droked  or  Dromed,  but  there  was  no 
such  place  in  Tasmania,  so  it  could  not  be  either  of  them. 
Then  what  was  it  ?  The  Yorkshireman  looked  steadily  at  it 
for  a  good  five  minutes,  and  then  he  exclaimed,  ^^  Avoca!'' 
To  be  sure  it  is  Avoca.  We  all  saw  now  that  it  was  Avoca, 
yet  nevertheless  the  deciphering  of  the  word  showed  great 
sharpness  on  the  part  of  Mr  Sykes,  for  that  was  the  York- 
shireman's  name.  Well,  when  we  had  fairly  started,  I  found 
Mr  Sykes  had  remained  on  board  the  Pioneer^  so  I  scraped 
acquaintance  with  him.  ^^  You  did  me  great  service,"  I  said, 
"  by  unravelling  that  crooked  address  for  me,  which  had  defied 
even  the  practical  men  of  the  post-office  to  decipher."  **  I  am 
glad  of  it,"  he  said,  ^^  but  I  must  tell  you  I  have  had  some 
practice  in  such  matters.  I  was  once  postmaster  of  a  district 
in  this  neighbourhood  for  six  years."  "  Oh,"  said  I,  "  then 
that  accounts  for  the  milk  in  the  cocoa-nut."  Well,  I  stuck 
to  Mr  Sykes,  and  he  gave  me  a  deal  of  information  as  to 
the  relative  value  of  land  on  the  north-west  coast,  and  I  was 
sorry  when  he  left  us  at  Port  SorrelL  I  am  writing  now  in 
my  room  at  Mr  Lyons'  at  the  Mersey,  to  which  I  have  come 
for  the  chance  of  getting  a  better  night's  rest  than  I  could 
hope  for  on  board  th^  Pioneer, 

9tAj  Circular  Head. — ^We  got  away  from  the  Mersey  at  8.30 
yesterday  morning,  with  a  fresh  breeze  blowing  from  the  west 
right  in  our  teeth,  and  arrived  here  at  midnight,  stopping  on 
the  way  at  the  Forth,  the  Penguin,  Emu  Bay,  and  Table  Gape. 
At  this  last-named  place  we  took  on  board  a  constable  in 
charge  of  two  young  women  who  had  committed  some  small 
crime,  and  were  being  sent  to  Circular  Head  for  trial.  The 
Pioneer  is  a  twin-screw  steamer  of  fifty-one  tons  burthen, 
cost  £4000  in  Melbourne,  where  she  was  built ;  she  is  owned 
by  a  company  of  some  twenty  shopkeepers,  farmers,  and 
merchants  living  along  this  coast,  and  she  pays,  they  tell  me, 
a  good  percentage  on  the  money  invested.  Besides  the 
Pioneer  J  there  is  a  small  paddle-wheel  steamer  also  running 


CIRCULAR  HEAD—  WYNYARD—EMU  BAY.      257 

between  Launceston  and  Circular  Head,  upon  which  the 
owners  of  the  Pioneer  make  war  to  the  knife. 

8^  Jamtary  1871. — After  remaining  at  Circolar  Head 
and  in  the  neighhonrhood,  where  the  Van  Diemen's  Land 
Company  have  large  possessions  of  valuahle  land,  I  left 
on  horseback  for  Launceston  with  the  view  of  seeing  some- 
what of  the  country  between  Circular  Head  and  Launceston, 
I  distance  of  200  miles.  Our  first  night  after  starting  we 
paised  at  Table  Cape,  forty-three  miles.  The  road  for 
twenty  miles  lay  over  sandy  beaches  and  through  scrubs 
alternately;  then  we  crossed  Rocky  Cape,  Breakneck  Hill, 
and  the  Sisters,  probably  some  700  feet  high,  and  again  de- 
loended  to  the  beach ;  so  it  was  still  alternately  scrub  and 
beach  until  we  reached  the  end  of  our  day's  journey.  A 
doien  miles  of  our  journey  were  made  through  a  dense 
forest  cumbered  with  fallen  trees.  On  the  Sisters  grows  a 
peculiar  and  beautiful  species  of  Banksia^  the  leaf  long  and 
serrated;  it  grows  into  a  good-sized  tree,  and  produces  a 
cone  studded  with  wooden  nuts  as  hard  as  iron,  and  so  firmly 
attached  to  the  cone  that  they  are  separated  from  it  with 
great  difficulty.  This  nut  contains  the  seed,  of  which  I 
fennd  some  of  last  year's  growth  still  on  the  trees.  In  the 
days  when  Tasmania  was  a  penal  settlement,  a  convict  who 
vas  lucky  enough  to  discover  any  valuable  natural  produc- 
tion, on  making  it  known  to  the  Government,  was  always  re- 
garded. They  tell  a  story  of  one  of  these  gentry,  in  passing 
dong  this  coast,  coming  upon  the  Banksia  I  have  mentioned, 
of  which  he  gathered  some  cones,  and  took  them  to  the 
poper  authorities,  declaring  he  had  gathered  them  from  some 
noble  pine-trees,  of  which  he  had  discovered  an  extensive 
forest  The  cone  being  perfectly  new  to  the  authorities,  they 
Mieved  the  convict's  story,  and  rewarded  him  for  his  luck 
Ij  giving  him  a  ticket-of-leave. 

There  is  a  good  inn  at  Wynyard,  where  we  passed  the 
>^ght,  and  the  next  morning  rode  on  to  Emu  Bay,  twelve 
^iles,  the  road  almost  all  the  way  being  over  a  sandy  shore, 
^urnie,  the  township  of  Emu  Bay,  is  pleasantly  situated  on 
^^  west  shore  of  the  bay,  commanding  a  fine  sea  view,  and 
^  one  of  the  most  healthy  spots  on  the  north-west  coast.  It 
forms  part  of  the  Van  Diemen's  Land  Company's  property, 


2S8        VAN  DlEMEirS  LAND  CO:S  PROPERTY. 

which  here  extends  inland  in  one  continuous  block  hy  the 
road  for  some  fifty  odd  miles,  and  contains  210,000  acres  of 
probably  the  best  land,  taken  as  a  whole,  in  Tasmania;  and 
a  little  farther  on  the  Company  possesses  another  block, 
called  the  Middlesex  Plains,  containing  four  square  miles,  or 
10,000  acres. 

The  western  point  of  Emu  Bay,  extending  from  the  Com- 
pany's mined  wharf  for  a  good  half-mile  seawards,  is  composed 
entirely  of  colnmnsa  basalt  in  its  most  perfect  form,  in  some 
parts  quite  covered  at  high-water,  and  in  others  standing  up 
above  high-water  mark  some  twelve  to  fourteen  feet  These 
columns  or  pillars,  isolated  in  blocks,  look  as  if  they  were 
the  work  of  the  hand  of  man,  built  up  of  slabs,  some  square, 
but  principally  five  and  six  sided,  from  one  to  two  inches  in 
thickness,  and  from  eighteen  inches  to  two  feet  in  diameter. 
A  good  portion,  however,  of  the  point  is  an  even  platform, 
quite  flat,  of  column®  basalt  The  columns  look  as  if  they  had 
been  driven  down  like  so  many  piles,  and  cemented  together 
in  many  places  with  molten  iron,  but  generally  so  beautifully 
fitted  into  each  other  that  there  is  no  room  for  cement  I  do 
not  know  what  this  rocky  cement  is,  but  it  is  also  found  in 
places,  covering  the  face  of  columns  in  thin  plates,  with  the 
perfect  appearance  of  iron.  I  should  call  it  an  oxide  of 
columnsB  basalt  No  columnaa  basalt  can  be  more  perfect  in 
form.  It  exists  in  many  parts  of  the  coast  between  Port 
Dalrymple  and  Circular  Head,  but  nowhere  else,  I  believe, 
in  so  perfect  a  form  as  at  Emu  Bay.  At  Law's,  where  we 
first  drew  rein  on  entering  Emu  Bay — a  very  good  house, 
but  a  very  bad  inn,  or  rather  no  inn  at  all  at  present,  for 
Law  has  been  bankrupt  lately — we  found  Mrs  Law  in  bed, 
and  Law  himself  with  one  arm  in  a  sling.  We  walked  on 
to  Mr  M.'s,  where  we  were  hospitably  entertained  during 
our  stay  at  Emu  Bay. 

On  New-Year!s  Day  we  witnessed  a  great  gathering  of  the 
children  of  the  district,  and  many  of  the  grown-up  people 
also,  on  the  occasion  of  a  feast  given  to  the  Sunday-school 
children,  to  whom  prizes  were  distributed  by  the  clergyman 
of  the  district  The  assemblage  was  a  creditable  one  for 
Emu  Bay,  and  included  children  of  all  denominations. 
Population  is  scanty  in  this  part  of  Tasmania;   the  Emu 


EMU  BAY— PENGUIN  SIL  VER  MINE,  259 

6tj  diviflioD,  the  coast-line,  exteDding  from  the  Blythe  to 
the  Cam,  containiDg  only  471  souls. 

The  next  day  after  our  arrival  at  Emu  Bay  we  visited  the 
Feogain  silver  miue,  twelve  miles,  partly  along  the  beach 
eutward  of  Emu  Bay ;  the  road  is  good  all  the  way,  and 
ihe  seaward  views  from  many  parts  of  it  quite  put  me  in 
mind  of  the  Corniche  road  between  Nice  and  Oenoa.  The 
iluft,  sunk  to  a  depth  of  sixty -three  feet,  is  just  above 
ki^-water  mark.  Nevertheless,  with  the  assistance  of  a 
RDgle  horse  working  only  a  few  hours  in  the  week,  the 
nine  is  kept  free  from  water.  From  the  bottom  of  the 
ihift  they  are  now  driving  in  both  directions,  following  the 
reef  under  the  sea,  and  also  towards  the  hills.  A  good  deal 
of  quartz  is  being  brought  to  the  surface ;  some  of  it,  of 
vhich  I  took  samples,  looks  rich,  but  until  submitted  to 
imy  I  can't  say  much  about  it.  There  were  only  two  men 
vorking  in  the  mine  when  we  were  there,  owing  to  the  races 
fchen  going  on  at  Emu  Bay. 

The  rocks  at  Emu  Bay  are  visited  by  penguins,  and  four 
rears  ago  a  pair  of  these  birds  took  to  making  a  nest  in  one 
)fmany  old  boxes  in  a  shed  in  MrM.'s  backyard,  and  have 
continued  to  do  so  every  year  since*  I  paid  several  visits  to 
the  nest;  the  old  bird  was  there,  but  did  not  show  the 
slightest  sign  of  fear.  The  young  bird — for  there  was  but 
ODe,  the  other  having  died  in  the  nest  and  been  removed  by 
Mrs  M. — is  now  nearly  three  weeks  old,  and  must  be  nearly 
Ridy  to  leave,  for  it  looks  almost  as  big  as  its  mother,  and 
WIS  squatted  down  alongside  of  her  or  up  in  a  corner,  but 
dose  to  the  nest.  The  first  night  I  was  at  Emu  Bay  I 
lieard  a  loud  noise  about  midnight  in  the  backyard,  some- 
thing between  the  neighing  of  a  horse  and  the  braying  of 
^  donkey.  This  was  the  male  bird  come  on  a  visit  to  his 
fionily— a  common  occurrence,  Mrs  M.  told  me,  during  the 
time  of  incubation,  and  after  the  eggs  were  hatched.  The 
^it  was  always  made  about  midnight  On  going  to  the 
i^eat  as  soon  as  I  got  up,  I  found  the  old  bird  had  gone,  the 
young  one  left  by  itself.  The  old  bird  remained  away  the 
vhole  of  that  day,  but  I  found  her  back  in  the  nest  the 
following  morning.  Mrs  M.,  although  taking  a  great 
^terest  in  her  penguins  and  watching  them  narrowly,  had 


26o  STORY  OF  PENGUINS. 

never  observed  the  old  bird  feeding  tbe  young  one,  nor  bad 
sbe  ever  observed  any  remains  of  food  about  tbe  nest    The 
yoang  bird  must,  bowever,  bave  been  well  fed ;  for  it  grew 
fast,  nmcb  faster  tban  a  brood  of  young  ducks  whicb  was 
batched  about  the  same  time.     During  the  whole  four  years 
the  old  birds  have   never  once  succeeded  in  rearing  their 
young  to  maturity  and  carrying  them  off,  some  accident  or 
other  always  befell  the  young  ones  before  they  were  able  to 
take  care  of  themselves ;  and,  curiously  enough,  these  birds 
still  returned  year  after  year  to  make  their  nest  and  hatch 
their  young  in  the  same  place,  for  no  doubt  it  must  have 
been  the  same  pair  that  idways  came.    The  old  birds  occa- 
sionally mixed  up  with  the  poultry,  but  never  for  the  purpose 
of  feeding  with  them.     It  would  seem  that  these  birds  would 
not  be  easily  driven  away  from  the  shed  they  had  choseD, 
for  only  this  year,  when  the  two  old  birds  first  came,  they 
took  possession   of  two  empty  upright  flour-barrels.     Mrs 
M.,  fearing  the  penguins  might  not  be  able  to  get  out  of  the 
barrels  standing  in  that  position,  laid  the  barrels  down  on 
their  sides.     The  birds — ^fancying,  no  doubt,  that  this  was 
a  hint  to  them  to  go  elsewhere — ^left  the  barrels  and  took  to 
one  of  the  old  boxes ;  but  it  seems  never  to  have  occurred 
to  their  penguinships  to  abandon  the  shed  and  seek  accom- 
modation elsewhere.     The  male  bird  always  paid  his  visits 
at  night,  though  he  often  remained  the  whole  of  next  day ; 
and  he  always  took  his  departure  at  night.     Two  months 
after,  in  the  beginning  of  March,  I  returned  to  Emu  Bay, 
and  found  the  young  penguin  sitting  quietly  in  a  box  in  tbe 
backyard.      The   greater  part   of  the   old  shed    had  been 
removed,  and  I  learned  from  Mr  M.  that  about  six  weeks 
ago  the  old  female  bird  had  disappeared;  and  as  a  dead 
penguin,  killed  by  some  accident,  had  been  found  in  tbe 
neighbourhood,  he  feared  it  might  be  his  bird  ;  and  a  little 
more  than  a  month  since  the  young  penguin,   now  a  full- 
grown  bird,  had  also  disappeared,  and  after  being  absent  for 
a  month  had  returned  to  the  yard  only  the  day  before  I 
arrived.     I  remained  at  Emu  Bay  the  best  part  of  three 
days,  and  daring  that  time  I  paid  several  visits  to  the  yard, 
and  always  found  the  young  penguin  looking  very  comfort- 
able, reposing  in  the  corner  of  a  box.     How  his  domestic 


EMU  BA  Y— HAMPSHIRE  HILLS.  261 

arrangements,  ccx>king,  &c.,  were  carried  on,  I  am  at  a  loss 
to  ooigectare ;  bat  certain  it  is  the  fellow  looked  very  fat 
tod  jolly.  One  month  afterwards  (April)  I  again  visited 
£ma  Bay,  bat  I  did  not  find  my  friends  the  pengains  in  the 
OQthoase  at  Mr  M.'s.  The  yoang  one  (after  my  second  visit 
ID  March)  had  absented  himself  for  a  day  or  two,  and  after- 
vards  had  retarned,  accompanied  by  another  penguin ;  bat 
they  had  both  gone  when  I  arrived  at  Ema  Bay,  and  in  all 
probability  may  not  return  until  the  breeding  season  com- 
mences in  November  next.  With  the  exception  of  these 
Uids  whose  history  I  have  been  detailing,  I  never  saw  a 
life  penguin  at  Emu  Bay.  A  dead  one  occasionally  I  have 
leen  washed  upon  the  beach,  but  never  a  live  one ;  so  they 
eonld  not  have  been  abundant  in  the  immediate  neighbour- 
bood.  The  small  islands  to  which  they  resort  in  large 
numbers  must  be  more  than  fifty  miles  from  Emu  Bay. 

Tbe  bulk  of  the  land  bordering  on  Emu  Bay  might  be 
said  to  belong  to  the  Van  Diemen's  Laud  Company ;  some 
of  it  has  been  sold,  and  a  portion  of  it  farmed  on  leases. 
We  rode  for  half  a  day  among  these  farms ;  the  land  is  ex- 
cellent, none  better  in  Tasmania^  but  the  labour  of  clearing 
in  this  densely  and  heavily  timbered  country  is  immense. 
Bonbtless  some  day  or  other  the  timber,  which  is  now  an 
obBtmction,  will  become  of  great  value. 

On  coming  to  Emu  Bay  from  Table  Cape  we  encountered 
aonall  whale  on  the  beach,  thirty  feet  long:  it  had  been 
feond  floundering  in  the  sand  and  killed  the  day  before  by  a 
fnblican  residing  in  the  neighbourhood. 

On  the  4th  we  left  Emu  Bay,  accompanied  by  Lennard,  an 
old  Company's  servant,  well  acquainted  with  the  road  we 
vere  to  travel  as  f ar  aa  the  Hampshire  Hills,  and  in  other 
days,  some  thirty  years  ago,  well  acquainted  with  the  road 
^  &r  as  the  Surrey  Hills,  and  even  on  to  the  Middlesex 
Rinns,  and  thence  to  Deloraine.  Our  route  for  several  miles 
^  starting  lay  through  thick  scrub  and  forest  land,  diver- 
sified a  little  by  rough  clearings,  and  afterwards  by  a  chain 
<^ plains.  On  arriving  at  the  Hampshire  Hills  hut  of  Messrs 
Relds,  we  found  ourselves  on  an  extensive  plain  of  fair-look- 
^%  pastare-land  surrounding  the  station,  very  prettily  situ- 
^Ml    We  passed  by  the  garden  of  the  old  Company,  in 


262        HAMPSHIRE  HILLS—  WALABY  STEAKS. 

which  were  apple  and  pear  trees,  and  several  kinds  of  cherries, 
enclosed  within  a  fence  of  elm  and  oak,  now  so  choked  and 
overgrown  that  it  was  with  difficulty  we  could  get  throngli  it, 
which  we  were  endeavouring  to  do  after  we  had  put  thingB 
in  train  at  the  hut  for  getting  something  to  eat     The  old 
Company  had  a  grand  house  here,  this  being  one  of  thar 
principal  establishments.     Not  a  vestige  of  it  now  remains, 
totally  and  entirely  destroyed  by  fire ;  neither  is  there  a  sign 
left  of  a  well-macadamised  road  which,  twenty-five  yean 
ago,  led  up  to  it  from  the  river.     On  our  arrival  we  found 
the  hut  empty,  but  on  runmiaging  about  we  discovered  tea 
and  sugar  and  a  loaf  of  bread ;  so  we  made  a  fire,  and  pat 
the  kettle  on,  and  the  smoke  from  the  chimney  soon  broaght 
home  the  master,  who  had  not  been  very  far  distant  em- 
ployed in  lighting  fires  to  burn  the  scrub  and  rough  grass. 
Jemmy,  for  that  is  the  name  of  Messrs  Fields*  station-cook, 
went  to  work  in  earnest,  and  in  half  aq  hour  after  our 
arrival  we  sat  down  to  a  good  dish  of  fried  walaby  steaks, 
doing  ample  justice  to  it,  washing  it  down,  as  is  the  cusfana 
on  all  occasions  hereabouts,  with  oceans  of  tea. 

The  walaby  may  be  called  a  small  kangaroo,  but  is  much 
nicer   eating   than   its  larger  congener.      We  had  ridden 
twenty-one  miles,  and  had  nineteen  miles  more  to  do  befnre 
reaching  the  station  at  the  Surrey  Hills,  so  after  finishing 
our  repast,  and  regaling  Jemmy  with  a  couple  of  glasses  of 
brandy — he  excused  himself  from  taking  any  more,  stating 
that  a  year  or  two  ago  he  had  suffered  ^'  Dolorous  Trimbles  " 
— we  saddled  our  horses,  and  went  on  our  way  rejoicing. 
Our  road  lay  through  alternate  forest  and  grassy  land,  and 
across  the  river  Wey.     In  the  evening  we  reached  the  "  hut," 
a  really   large   and   comfortable   place.      The   hut-keeper, 
Charley,  who  had  been  on  the  station  for  thirty- two  years, 
soon  set  before  us  some  cold  beef  and  hot  tea,  which,  did  not 
come  amiss,  though  we  had  eaten  our  fill  of  walaby  a  few 
hours   before  at  the  Hampshire  Hills.      After   supper  we 
lounged  about  for  a  couple  of  hours,  and  then  went  to  bed, 
not  between  sheets,  but  between  opossum  rugs,  which  we  soon 
found  to  be  well  stocked  with  fleas.     We  rested,  notwith* 
standing  the  fleas,  and  got  up  in  the  morning  considerably 
refreshed.     At  the  breakfast-table  Charley  informed  us  that 


SURREY  HILL&^MIDDLESEX  PLAINS,        363 

he  had  got  up  at  one  o'clock  and  had  gone  out  badger-hnnt- 
ing,  the  weather  during  the  day  being  too  hot  for  his  dogs, 
and  had  killed  four  badgers,  bringing  home  three  skins  and 
one  entire  animal  This  Tasmanian  badger  is  not  unlike  a 
small  bear.  Charley  had  with  him  a  rare  lot  of  kangaroo- 
dogs,  I  believe  a  whole  dozen  of  them,  really  ferocious  ani- 
mals. Two  or  three  days  before  our  arrival  at  the  hut, 
Charley  was  out  with  his  dogs,  and  fell  in  with  a  flock  of 
hyenas,  seven  of  them,  of  which  his  dogs  captured  four. 
Our  guide,  Lennard,  was  an  old  chum  of  Charley's,  one  of 
those  emigrants  who  had,  some  thirty  years  before,  'Meft 
their  country  for  their  country's  good,"  and  had  become  an 
assigned  servant  of  the  Company.  We  brought  him  with  us 
to  steer  us  through  these  solitudes  from  behind  the  bar  of 
his  own  public  at  Emu  Bay.  Charley  remarked,  observing 
that  Lennard  was  making  a  poor  breakfast,  that  publicans 
seldom  eat  much  at  breakfast  *^As  for  myself,"  he  said,  ^^  the 
morning  after  I  have  been  out  badger- hunting  at  night  I 
always  eat  two  pounds  of  meat  for  breakfast,  to  make  up  for 
the  waste  created  by  want  of  sleep." 

As  we  had  but  twenty-eight  miles  to  ride  before  reaching 
Middlesex  Plains,  our  next  halting-place,  we  were  not  very 
early  in  the  saddle.  It  was  eight  o'clock  before  we  left  the 
Surrey  Hills  hut,  for  it  was  past  ten  when  we  reached 
Thompson  Park,  a  grass  paddock  of  about  thirty  acres, 
with  a  hut  standing  on  it,  seven  miles  from  the  Surrey  Hills 
station.  We  remained  here  an  hour  to  give  our  horses  a 
feed,  and  then  started  afresh.  We  got  on  very  well  until 
we  crossed  the  hill  that  divides  the  Surrey  Hills  station  from 
the  Vale  of  Belvoir,  about  four  miles  from  the  Middlesex 
Plains.  The  view  from  this  hill  or  ridge,  which  is  called  the 
Bluff,  a  spur  of  the  Burn  Bluff  some  fifteen  miles  off,  is 
remarkably  extensive,  and  takes  in  large  tracts  of  grassy 
and  forest  land.  With  the  exception  of  Mounts  Pearce, 
Catley,  and  Belmont,  the  whole  country  looks  like  an 
interminable  level,  or  more  properly  a  sea  of  gentle  un- 
dulations. As  I  have  said,  we  got  on  all  right  until 
we  descended  into  the  Yale  of  Belvoir  at  2  p.m.,  but  here 
we  lost  the  track,  and  the  memory  of  our  guide,  Len- 
nard, irho  had  not  been  here  for  twenty-seven  years,  no 


264        MIDDLESEX  PLAINS— MRS  FRANCES. 

longer  served  him  as  it  had  hitherto  done,  and  we  lost  our 
way.     For  fonr  hours  we  were  wandering  about  in  a  yerj 
unpleasant  state   of  mind^  sometimes   leading,  sometimes 
driving  our  horses  through  bogs.    On  one  occasion  my  horse 
floundered  and  fell  against  me,  very  unceremoniously  kno<^- 
ing  me  down,  and  then  falling  upon  top  of  me.     Well  for 
me  was  it  the  ground  was  boggy  and  soft ;  had  it  been  hard, 
my  leg  would  unavoidably  have  been  broken  ;  as  it  was,  it 
was  only  crushed,  no  bones  broken,  so  that  I  was  soon  able 
to  get  into  the  saddle  again ;  it  will,  however,  be  many  days 
before  I  am  quite  right    At  6.30  we  stumbled  upon  the  hut, 
and  right  glad  I  was.     Here  we  found  a  man  and  his  wife, 
and  a  clean  and  comfortable  hut      A  very  few  minutes 
sufficed  for  Mrs  Frances  to  give  us  a  cup  of  good  tea,  with 
abundance  of  milk,  toast,  and  bread  and  butter ;  and  when 
bedtime  came  she  provided  us  with  flealess  bed-dothes,  an 
unusual  luxury  in  the  bush.     Husband  and  wife  were  both 
middle  age,  or  even  younger,  and  still  they  had  been  living 
in  this  isolated  spot  for  some  fifteen  years.    He  was  a  very 
handy  fellow;  he  tanned  the  hide,  out  of  which  he  made 
boots  and  shoes  for  himself,  his  wife,  and  his  child ;  he  was 
an  adept  at  shoeing  a  horse  or  drawing  a  tooth,   having 
himself  made  a  first-rate  pair  of  forceps  with  which  to  perform 
this  last-named  operation;    he  tanned  opossum-skins,  first 
having  caught  the  animals  himself,  and  then  made  them  into 
handsome  rugs ;  in  fact,  there  were  few  things  to  which  he 
could  not  turn  his  hand.    The  wife  was  equally  handy,  I 
have  no  doubt    A.  M^Calder,  who  passed  this  way  in  1865, 
thus  writes  of  her :  ^^  Dooley  and  myself  were  first  in  the 
saddle,  ready  for  an  early  start,  waiting  the  company  of  our 
female  guide,  when  forth  she  came,  leading  her  horse,  which, 
to  our  amazement,  she  mounted  astraddle,  and  £hus  rode  the 
whole  way  to  Chudleigh  (about  thirty-six  miles)  with  an 
amount  of  unconcern  that  surprised  us  not  a  little,  and  as 
if  determined  we  should  lose  no  part  of  this  extraordinary 
feat  of  horsewomanship,  she  rode  in  front  of  us  nearly  the 
whole  distance,  smoking  a  dirty  little  black  pipe  from  one 
end  of  the  journey  to  the  other.'*     This  woman  was  Mrs 
Frances,  who  gave  us  clean  beds,  and  tea  and  cofiiee  for  break- 
fast next  morning.    At  the  Hampshire  and  Surrey  Hills,  and 


L 


MIDDLESEX  PLAINS  TO  CHUDLEIGH.         265 

here  at  the  Middlesex  Plains  station,  we  saw  numbers  of 
bhck  cockatoos,  I  asked  Frances  if  he  ever  took  the  young  ? 
He  had  never  seen  a  nest,  he  said,  and  had  no  idea  where 
they  bred.  During  our  journey  we  saw  many  kangaroo  and 
Wilaby. 

These  Middlesex  Plains,  four  square  miles,  or  10,000 
acres,  form  the  limit  of  the  Company's  property  in  this  direc- 
tioiL  Next  morning,  after  Frances  had  put  a  couple  of  hind- 
ihoes  on  Lennard's  horse,  he  started  with  us  to  show  us 
die  road  as  far  as  Gbd's  Hill,  fourteen  miles.  ^^  The  hut  at 
Middlesex  Plains  stands  about  2800  feet  above  the  sea.  We 
continued  on  grassy  land  for  the  next  four  miles,  when 
ve  commenced  the  descent  into  the  truly  profound  and 
fonnidable  valley  of  the  Forth  river  by  a  steep  and  most 
binen  slope  called  the  Three-Mile  Rise.  We  led  our  horses 
down,  down,  and  down,  till  I  was  quite  sick  of  descending, 
and  it  seemed  as  if  we  were  never  going  to  reach  the  bottom 
of  this  abominable  ravine. 

'*  The  river  Forth  crossed,  we  commenced  rising  the  famous 
Qad's  Hill,  the  ascent  from  the  stream  being  as  long  and  as 
iteep  as  the  hill  on  the  other  side,  the  only  difference  be- 
tween them  being  that  the  soil  on  the  eastern  rise  is  much 
better  than  that  on  the  other.  The  tableland  on  the  top  of 
Gad's  Hill  (which  is  rather  indifferent)  is  three  miles  across, 
and  in  midway  of  it  is  a  small  plain  where  the  Messrs  Fields 
have  a  hut  standing  in  an  enclosed  paddock,  at  which 
we  were  most  heartily  welcomed,  as  indeed  is  usual  at  all 
theee  stations."  I  can  endorse  this  account  as  true  in  every 
particular,  even  to  the  welcome  at  the  hut,  where  we  arrived 
it  11.30  A.  iL,  and  where  we  dined  off  the  best  piece  of  corned 
beef  and  best  ham  I  had  eaten  in  Tasmania.  We  remained 
aa  hour  and  a  half  at  this  hut  and  then  moved  on,  and  soon 
began  the  descent  of  Gad's  Hill  down  to  the  Mersey,  which 
ii  ako  very  steep,  but  not  so  bad,  I  think,  as  the  hiU  we  had 
joat  passed.  The  ford  at  the  Mersey  is  about  1500  feet 
ibove  the  sea.  We  soon  reached  Circular  Pond  Marsh,  now 
^oeed  and  turned  into  a  pretty  little  farm ;  and  all  along 
the  road  until  we  reached  Chudleigh  we  met  with  more  or 
kaa  cultivation.  At  Chudleigh  we  arrived  towards  evening, 
dined  at  Backett's  Inn,  and  started  again  at  8  p.m.   for 


266  DELORAINE— GEORGE  TOWN. 

Deloraine,  distant  ten  miles.  We  reached  Deloraine  at  10 
p.iLy  haying  ridden  forty-six  miles.  Ohudleigh  is  a  flourish- 
ing settlement,  and  a  good  road  connects  it  with  Deloraine, 
from  which  place  to  Lannceston  a  railway  has  lately  been 
constrncted,  though  not  yet  open  for  traffic  The  distance 
by  rail  is  forty-five  miles  to  Lannceston;  by  the  coach- 
road  only  thirty  miles.  I  travelled  by  coach  next  day,  and 
got  to  the  Brisbane  Hotel.  Circular  Head  to  Lannceston  is 
197  miles. 

The  12tA. — I  embarked*  on  board  the  Annie  for  Gtoorge 
Town,  where  I  calculated  on  arriving  at  1.30  the  following 
day,  but  in  consequence  of  something  like  a  gale  of  wind 
blowing  from  N.E.,  we  did  not  reach  our  destination  until 
4  P.M.  The  Annie  is  a  little  twenty-horse  paddle-steamer 
running  between  Lannceston  and  the  ports  on  the  N.  W.  coast 
as  far  as  the  Mersey. 

Immediately  on  reaching  Gkorge  Town  I  was  fortunate  in 
obtaining  a  horse  to  proceed  to  the  gold  mines  at  Nine-Mile 
Springs,  the  object  of  my  little  trip.  The  Nine-Mile  Springs 
are  ten  miles  from  George  Town,  and  by  following  the  tele- 
graph wire  I  had  no  difficulty  in  finding  the  way;  in  an 
hour  and  a  half  I  alighted  at  a  wooden  shanty,  a  comfortable 
inn  enough  for  the  bush.  The  mines  in  this  locality  were 
discovered  hardly  a  year  ago,  and  the  village  consists  now 
of  some  twenty  wooden  houses,  very  roughly  built  The 
Shamrock  mine  being  close  to  the  inn,  I  paid  that  a  visit 
as  soon  as  I  arrived.  There  was  no  work  going  on,  but 
there  were  a  few  tons  of  stone  at  the  mouth  of  the  mine, 
which  looked  to  me  to  be  promising  quartz,  although  I  failed 
to  discover  gold  in  any  of  the  pieces  I  examined.  The  com- 
pany owning  the  mine  have  clearly  a  good  opinion  of  it,  for 
they  have  imported  from  Melbourne,  and  which  is  now  being 
carted  from  George  Town,  the  machinery  necessary  for  crush- 
ing the  quartz,  and  may  be  all  in  working  order  in  about 
three  months.  This  morning  I  visited  the  Excelsior,  situ- 
ated on  the  slope  of  a  hill^  distant  from  the  village  one  and 
a  half  miles.  The  company  has  already  sunk  three  shafts 
on  this  reef,  the  deepest  fifty  feet;  the  reef,  they  say,  is 
from  four  feet  nine  inches  to  nearly  six  feet  wide.  There 
are  some  250  tons  ore  already  out  of  this  mine ;  it  is  a  slaty 


MINES  AT  NINE.MILE  SPRINGS.  267 

sort  of  quartz.  A  few  minutes*  search  enabled  me  to  discoyer 
gold  in  two  or  three  stones.  The  erection  of  crushing 
machinery  is  now  being  proceeded  with,  and  in  about  six 
weeks  hence  there  will  be  ten  stamps  at  work.  There  is  no 
end  of  wood  close  at  hand  for  firing ;  in  fact,  these  mines  are 
in  the  midst  of  a  forest  There  is  a  creek  at  the  foot  of  the 
hill  upon  the  slope  of  which  the  shafts  have  been  opened,  and 
it  was  in  the  sand  of  this  creek  that  gold  was  first  discovered, 
which  afterwards  led  to  a  successful  search  being  made  for 
the  reef.  The  same  circumstance  led  to  the  discovery  of  the 
Shamrock  mine.  After  breakfast  I  mounted  my  horse  to 
retorn  to  Launoeston,  thirty  miles  distant.  En  route^  about 
three  miles  from  the  Springs,  I  stopped  to  visit  the  Industry 
mine,  a  claim  owned  and  about  to  be  worked  by  a  dozen 
practical  miners.  The  reef  here  seems  to  consist  of  broken 
bits  of  quartz  mixed  up  with  earth.  A  couple  of  pans  of  this 
stone  and  earth  were  dag  out  and  washed  in  my  presence, 
and  produced  several  grains  of  gold.  Some  people  call  these 
diggings  alluvial,  but  they  mistake  in  doing  so,  for  the  stones 
containing  the  gold  are  not  at  all  water-worn.  The  gold- 
bearing  line  of  strata  looks  like  a  disintegrated  reef  of  quartz. 
I  obtained  at  this  mine  several  bits  of  quartz  all  showing 
{old.  The  principal  man  here  interested  in  the  Industry 
mine  seems  very  sanguine  as  to  the  result  of  it.  Altogether 
there  seems  a  fair  prospect  of  these  mines  turning  out  well ; 
much,  however,  will  depend  upon  their  being  worked  with 
economy.  At  4  p.m.  I  reached  Launceston,  having  stopped 
for  an  hour  on  the  road  to  bait  my  horse.  It  rained  during 
part  of  this  journey,  but  not  much.  The  telegraph  wire 
pointed  out  the  road,  and  brought  me  along  all  right.  Part 
of  this  road  is  very  good,  the  whole  of  it  passable,  and  the 
river  scenery  pretty ;  in  places  some  cultivation  and  a  few 
decent  houses  are  met  with. 

Accompanied  some  friends  to  the  Launceston  racecourse, 
for  the  purpose  of  marking  out  a  line  for  the  steeplechase 
race  to  toke  place  on  the  14th  of  next  month.  We  accom- 
plished our  work  in  a  couple  of  hours,  and  have  given  the 
mnning  horses  some  stiff  work  to  do,  I  think. 

lOM,  Fingal. — Here  I  am  stuck  up  for  the  want  of  a  horse 
to  visit  the  Black  Boy  mines,  eighteen  miles  from  this,  or 


268  HOBART  TOWN— MUSEUM. 

any  conveyance  to  take  me  to  them,  so  I  may  as  well  write 
up  my  journal  during  my  forced  rest  •  On  Sunday  the 
ISth  I  took  my  place  in  the  mail-coach  at  Launceston.  We 
started  at  6  F.iCy  and  at  8  A.1C  next  morning  we  reached 
Hobart  Town,  distance  120  miles,  over  an  excellent  road  all 
the  way.  On  the  day  of  my  arrival  I  visited  the  museum, 
a  good  building  enough,  but  containing  little  of  interest, 
and  what  there  is  badly  described ;  indeed,  the  greater  por- 
tion of  the  contents  not  described  at  alL  There  are  some 
shells,  a  very  poor  collection ;  some  stuffed  birds,  badly  got 
up,  and  undescribed  ;  a  small  collection  of  minerals ;  two  or 
three  skeletons  of  fish ;  some  native  relics,  skulls,  &c.,  and 
some  reptiles  in  bottles,  undescribed.  A  great  portion  of  the 
whole  is  just  huddled  together  without  any  arrangement  I 
make  a  point  of  visiting  museums — the  attention  or  inatten- 
tion paid  to  such  establishments  helps  one,  more  or  less,  to 
form  an  opinion  of  the  ^^wire-pullers"  of  the  place.  The 
library  is  a  nice  establishment,  containing  7000  volumes. 
The  churches  are  numerous  and  respectable-looking.  A 
Protestant  cathedral  is  in  course  of  erection,  and  promises  to 
be  a  handsome  edifice.  There  are  in  all  twenty-one  churches 
here  for  a  population  of  less  than  20,000.  Government 
House  is  a  handsome  building,  the  finest  they  say  in  Australasia^ 
The  town-hall  and  the  post-office  are  both  good  buildings, 
and  so  are  the  (Government  offices.  The  buildings  are  prin- 
cipally of  stone,  the  streets  macadamised,  and  kept  in  good 
order.  The  port  is  all  that  can  be  desired,  easy  of  access, 
completely  landlocked,  and  large  enough  for  more  ships 
than  are  likely  ever  to  be  found  in  it  There  is  a  consider- 
able number  of  wooden  whar&,  where  some  fifteen  or  sixteen 
vessels  were  loading  or  discharging  cargo.  The  following  is 
a  fair  description  of  Hobart  Town :  ^^  I  have  heard  the  view 
of  Hobart  Town  to  be  compared  to  that  of  Genoa  from  the 
gulf;  but  whilst  fully  acknowledging  the  architectural  supe- 
riority of  Genoa  la  superbuj  with  its  magnificent  palaces 
rising  from  the  water's  edge,  and  ascending  tier  above  tier, 
like  the  seats  in  an  amphitheatre,  I  must  candidly  confess 
that  the  natural  beauties  of  the  capital  of  Tasmania  are 
superior  to  those  of  its  Italian  rival.  The  semicircular 
sweep  of  the  Bivera  is  very  fine,  but  the  irregular  outline 


HOB  ART  TO  WN—BLA  CK  BOY  DIGGINGS.      269 

of  the  estuary  of  the  Derwent,  with  its  jutting  promontories 
and  swelling  hills  and  background  of  mountains,  is,  I  should 
imagine,  perfectly  unique,  while  the  undulating  surface  of 
the  city  conduces  immensely  to  its  picturesqueness ;  and 
over  all  there  is  the  gigantic  figure  of  Mount  Wellington, 
with  its  head  in  the  clouds  and  its  feet  in  the  sea.  .... 
The  climate,  cool  and  breezy,  reminded  me  of  an  English 
April.  The  moist  greenness  everywhere  was  most  refreshing 
and  cheering ;  the  little  gardens  before  and  between  many 
of  the  houses  in  the  middle  of  the  town,  with  their  great 
bashes  of  geraniums  in  bloom,  were  all  full  of  sweet  English 
flowers,  looking  happy  and  healthy,  like  stout  rosy  children, 
that  everywhere  reminded  me  of  home.  The  houses,  too, 
were  more  snug  than  showy,  as  if  the  English  attribute  of 
comfort  more  especially  belonged  to  them.  Some  of  the 
Bnborban  streets,  or  rather  the  suburban  ends  of  them,  con- 
sisting of  good  detached  houses,  standing  in  nice  gardens, 
and  adorned  with  verandahs,  covered  with  lovely  plants,  are 
very  pleasant,  conmianding  fine  views  of  the  harbour ;  and 
from  every  point  I  visited.  Mount  Wellington  (or  Table 
Mountain)  forms  the  crowning  glory  of  the  landscape,  rising 
immediately  behind  the  town  to  the  height  of  4200  feet  With 
its  summit  of  basaltic  columns  covered  with  snow  more  than 
half  the  year,  its  aspect  is  one  of  ever-varying  but  never 
decreasing  grandeur."  Thus  much  about  Hobart  Town, 
somewhat  exaggerated  perhaps,  but  not  much,  for  doubtless 
it  is  one  of  the  most  prettily  situated  places  I  have  ever 
seen. 

At  4  A.M.  on  the  18th  I  started  from  Hobart  Town  for 
Lannceston,  and  at  3.30  p.m.  left  the  coach  at  Campbell 
Town,  remained  there  the  night,  and  at  4.30  a.m.  left  for 
this  place  (Fingal),  arriving  here  after  a  very  pretty  drive  of 
forty-one  miles  in  six  hours.  Here  I  am  stuck  up,  but  hope 
to  get  out  to  the  Black  Boy  diggings  sometime  this  evening. 
I  did  get  to  the  Black  Boy  diggings  on  the  evening  of  19th. 
The  road  from  Fingal,  eighteen  miles,  runs  through  in  great 
part  the  sheep-run  of  Mr  Talbot  of  Malhahide,  and  is  a  dis- 
grace to  the  authorities  whose  duty  it  is  to  see  it  kept  in 
order.  The  culverts  or  small  bridges — ^for  there  are  some 
twenly  to  cross-rare  every  one  of  them,  or  uearly  all,  danger- 


270  MINES  AT  THE  BLACK  BOY, 

ouB  for  horses,  and  accidents  are  constantly  happening,  so 
rotten  and  insecure  are  they.  The  road  otherwise  is  albo  in 
a  very  bad  state,  roots,  ruts,  and  stumps  everywhere  in  the 
way.  In  winter  it  must  be  impracticable  for  any  sort  of 
wheeled  vehicle.  It  took  me  two  and  a  half  hours  in  a  very 
light  trap  to  reach  the  diggings.  I  put  up  at  MarshalPs, 
the  only  place  where  a  shakedown  could  be  got — a  wooden 
shed,  under  the  roof  of  which  there  was  a  bar,  a  sitting-room, 
two  bedrooms,  and  a  sort  of  storeroom.  In  the  room  with 
me  was  a  miner,  one  or  two  more  in  the  little  sitting-room 
adjoining,  the  whole  family,  consisting  of  father,  mother,  and 
five  or  six  children,  in  the  other  bedroom,  into  which  from 
the  head  of  my  bed  was  a  large  air-hole  in  the  wall  four  feet 
square.  Besides  Marshall's  shanty,  there  are  some  twenty 
other  little  places  at  the.  diggings,  and  two  public-houses  in 
course  of  construction.  The  whole  site  was  bush  a  year  ago, 
or  somewhat  less,  and  the  trees  which  have  been  felled  are 
still  lying  about  cumbering  the  ground  everywhere. 

The  first  mine  I  visited  was  the  City  of  Hobart,  a  reef 
claim ;  here  a  tunnel  some  seventy  or  eighty  yards  long  has 
been  driven  into  the  side  of  the  hill,  following  the  reef,  out 
of  which  a  considerable  quantity  of  gold-bearing  quartz,  some 
of  it  very  rich,  has  been  extracted.  Machinery  is  now  being 
erected  to  crush  the  stone,  and  a  fair  trial  of  the  mine  will 
have  been  made  in  the  next  four  or  five  weeks.  If  rich 
specimens  are  a  sufficient  criterion,  this  mine  is  decidedly 
rich,  for  I  saw  some  taken  out  at  random,  with  gold  showing 
all  through  them.  Mr  Dooley  is  the  manager.  Another 
reef  I  visited,  called  the  Golden  Gate,  upon  which  work  has 
just  commenced,  looks  very  promising,  the  reef  being  well 
formed,  three  feet  wide,  and  yielding  rich  specimens.  Three- 
fourths  of  this  claim  have  just  been  sold  for  £700.  Had  it 
been  known  a  year  ago,  it  would  have  been  worth,  I  am  told, 
£7000.  An  alluvial  claim  I  visited,  worked  by  the  Messrs 
Legge,  was  producing  fairly,  and  the  Railway  claim,  upon 
which  some  £500  have  been  spent,  promises  to  be  remuner- 
ative. This  has  hitherto  been  worked  by  a  company,  and 
now  has  been  taken  on  tribute  by  the  company's  manager, 
who  is  sanguine  as  to  the  result.  He  gives  the  company 
one-tenth  of  the  yield.     Besides  these  claims,  there  are  the 


MINES  AT  THE  BLACK  BOY.  271 

Derby,  the  Gkuribaldi,  the  Caledonian,  the  Evening  Star,  and 
Wollej8,  all  being  worked  and  more  or  less  productive,  at  the 
Black  Boy.  From  the  last-mentioned  claim  a  nugget  weigh- 
ing an  ounce  nearly,  which  I  bought,  was  taken  a  day  or  two 
igo ;  and,  whilst  I  was  at  the  diggings,  two  men  brought  in 
ind  sold  to  Marshall  two  ounces  of  alluvial  gold,  got  in  one 
day  from  a  hole  they  had  just  opened.  In  the  centre  of 
tkese  workings  is  a  bog  where  water  is  found  by  digging 
down  a  couple  of  feet  There  are  120  men  employed  here 
it  present,  and  an  old  Victorian  miner  told  me  that  such  a 
p)ld-field  in  Victoria  would  draw  thousands  of  people  to  it, 
bat  in  Tasmania  they  have  no  pluck  for  such  work.  The 
Black  Boy  gold-field  is  decidedly  the  most  promising  I  have 
Men  in  Tasmania.  I  was  en  route  for  Fingal  at  11.30  A.M., 
ifter  having  spent  all  the  morning  investigating  these  em- 
biyo  gold-workings.  At  3  p.m.  I  left  Fingal  for  the  Corners, 
I  mail-coach  station,  where  I  dismounted  from  the  coach  at 
8  P.M.,  and  where  at  5.30  next  morning  I  picked  up  the 
coach  for  Launceston  coming  from  Hobart  Town,  and,  on 
my  arrival  at  Launceston,  at  10  a.m.,  finding  the  Tamar 
steamer  about  to  start,  I  stepped  on  board,  and  came  on  by 
ker  to  Melbourne,  where  I  arrived  at  3  p.m..  on  the  22d. 

On  the  road  to  the  Corners,  at  Avoca,  I  met  with  H. 
D.,  whom  I  sent  out  from  B.  in  1854.  He  told  me  he 
liad  done  very  well  the  first  few  years  after  his  arrival  in  the 
colony,  had  saved  money,  which  he  afterwards  lost  by  a  fire. 
He  is  now  on  a  farm  of  a  hundred  acres,  the  rent  being  £30 
I  year,  not  far  from  Avoca,  and  it  is  with  diflSculty  he  can 
Bet  enough  out  of  it  to  live  and  pay  his  rent.  The  land,  he 
itjs,  everywhere  in  his  neighbourhood,  has  been  so  worked, 
titkout  ever  having  had  anything  returned  to  it,  that  it  is 
i^ow  quite  exhausted,  and  requires  long  rest  to  be  made  to 
produce  anything.  This  is  pretty  generally  the  case,  I  be- 
liere,  in  many  parts  of  Tasmania ;  indeed,  all  over  Tasmania 
^  farming  interest  is  very  much  depressed ;  in  fact,  there 
^  a  general  depression  everywhere  in  the  colony.  No  proper 
^t  exists.  The  man  who  drives  the  stage-coach  between 
Campbell  Town  and  Hobart  Town  observed  to  me,  relative  to 
^  projected  railway  between  Hobart  Town  and  Launceston, 
'What  in  the  world  do  they  want  of  a  railway  when  we 


272  MEAT-CURING  ESTABLISHMENT. 

have  sncli  a  good  turnpike  road?''  and  his  notion  with 
regard  to  railways  may  be.  taken  as  a  type  of  the  feeling 
thronghoat  the  country  with  regard  to  the  undertaking  of 
new  works  generally  for  which  they  are  likely  to  be  called 
upon  to  pay. 

Febrtuary  4tA. — I  visited  a  meat-curing  establishment,  where 
they  kill,  cure,  and  put  up  into  cans  weekly  from  3000  to 
4000  sheep  and  a  hundred  bullocks.  In  the  kitchen,  the 
meat,  after  being  scalded  (not  boiled),  is  packed  in  tins 
holding  from  one  to  four  pounds  ;  the  covers  of  the  tins  are 
then  soldered  down,  a  small  hole  being  made  in  each  cover ; 
the  tins  are  then  passed  into  an  adjoining  room,  where  there 
are  several  large  coppers  containing  the  preserving  liquid, 
into  which  they  are  plunged,  and  subjected,  we  were  told,  to 
a  heat  much  above  that  of  boiling  water.  On  being  taken 
out  of  the  coppers,  the  tins,  or  rather  the  small  holes  in  the 
covers,  are  instantly  soldered  up.  From  the  preserving-room 
the  tins  are  let  down  into  a  rood  where  they  undergo  an 
examination,  and  if  found  apparently  all  right,  they  are 
passed  into  the  test-room,  where  the  temperature  is  brought 
up  to  120^  Here,  in  this  test-room,  subjected  to  this  heat 
of  about  120",  the  cans  remain  for  some  days,  and  at  the  end 
of  that  time,  should  there  be  any  can  with  bad  meat  in  it, 
resulting  from  some  part  of  the  process  having  been  imper- 
fectly performed,  the  cover,  which  when  placed  in  the  test- 
house  was  concave,  becomes  convex,  pu£fed  up  by  the  pressure 
of  the  gas,  which  is  sure,  in  such  a  high  temperature,  to 
form  very  quickly.  Any  bad  can  is  of  course  destroyed,  the 
good  cans  after  the  prescribed  period  being  removed  to  another 
room,  where  they  remain  until  quite  cool,  and  they  are  then 
painted,  labelled,  and  become  ready  for  shipment.  The  bulk 
of  the  fat  is  boiled  down  and  placed  in  casks. 

The  establishment  is  situated  at  Cray's  Cross,  half-a-dozen 
miles  from  Melbourne,  upon  a  small  salt-water  stream  con- 
nected with  the  Yarra,  the  crafts  into  which  the  casks  of  lard 
and  the  tins  of  preserved  meat  are  shipped  coming  close  up 
to  the  wharf  of  the  establishment.  From  this  establishment 
we  returned  by  rail  to  town,  and  took  a  cab  for  Pentridge, 
a  Grovemment  penal  establishment.  The  buildings  are  of 
blue-stone,  very  massive,  and  with  the  gardens  and  yards 


THE  STINKING  YARRA.  273 

occnpj  130  acres.  The  inmates  are  all  occupied  in  industrial 
pursuits.  Among  them  are  weavers,  carpenters,  blacksmiths, 
shoemakers,  tailors,  and  many  other  tradesmen.  The  con- 
struction of  this  prison  is  somewhat  like  the  Reading  model 
jail  in  its  interior  arrangements,  the  cells  being  very  similar 
in  size  and  fittings.  The  whole  establishment  wad  scrupu- 
lously clean  and  well  ventilated. 

Wth. — I  am  again  on  my  way,  on  board  the  Derwent, 
towards  Launceston,  steaming  down  the  stinking  Tarra.    The 
banks  of  this  river  are  quite  flat,  and  for  a  considerable  dis- 
tance between  Melbourne  and  Sandridge — the  port  for  large 
vessels — ^are  lined  with  bone-crushing,  wool-washing,  and  other 
pestilential  establishments,  and  the  stench  given  off  by  the 
operations  therein  carried  on  is  most  pestiferous.     I  really 
don't  know  that  I  have  ever  been  subjected  to  the  action  of 
such  a  compound  of  villanous  smells  for  so  long  a  time,  the 
gantlet*  you  have  to  run  being  four  miles  long  at  least. 
These  establishments  are  gigantic  nuisances  of  the  worst 
description,  and  how  they  can  be  tolerated  for  a  single  day 
bj  an  offshoot  from  a  European  population  who  has  done 
more  in  the  direction  of  hygienic  measures  of  late  years  than 
any  other  in  the  world,  is  a  mystery  to  me.     I  have  often 
had  my  attention  called  to  the  bad  smells  one  encounters  in 
the  narrow  and  crowded  streets  of  Cairo ;  I  have  traversed  in 
my  day  some  villanously  stinking  Chinese  villages,  and  I 
have  been  sickened  by  the  filth  of  the  native  town  of  Calcutta ; 
hat  I  never  met  with  anything  more  disgusting  than  the 
stench  from  the  legalised  establishments  on  the  banks  of 
the  Yarra,  a  river  upon  which  a  living  multitude  is  constantly 
passing  up  and  down ;  and  what  surprises  me  is,  that  although 
I  have  been  now  for  four  months  in  Australia,  I  have  never 
seen  any  complaint  of  this  gigantic  nuisance  in  the  public 
papers,  nor  indeed,  for  that  matter,  do  I  remember  to  have 
heard  a  single  one  of  the  inhabitants  complain  of  it     It 
took  us  an  hour  to  get  clear  of  the  stinking  Tarra,  and  right 
glad  the  crowd  we  had  on  board  must  have  been  to  get  into 
the  fresh  air  of  the  noble  bay  of  Port  Philip.     The  wind  at 
starting  was  blowing  pretty  fresh  from  the  north,  but  before 
dark  it  had  almost  wholly  died  away,  and  the  water  was  as 
smooth  as  a  mill-pond ;  but  in  the  face  of  this  my  aneroid 

s 


274  THE  TAMAR-^GEORGE  TOWN. 

was  showiDg  nnmistakable  signs  of  atmospheric  disturb 
and  so  it  was,  for  by  8  p.m.  it  was  blowing  a  sharp  gale 
the  Bonth-west,  which  increased  and  continued  all  th 
the  nighty  and  with  it  a  very  respectable  tumble  of  a  » 
up,  the  result  being  that  very  few  of  our  crowd  of  passe 
going  over  to  see  the  races  at  Launceston,  escaped  sei 
ness,  and  as  there  must  have  been  between  thirty  and 
lying  about  the  cabin  floor,  on  the  lockers,  and  up  o 
the  vessel's  counter,  for  whom  there  were  no  bertbi 
most  of  them  sick,  the  smell  in  the  cabin  was  almost  \ 
as  the  stench  on  the  Yarra.  We  survived  it,  howeve 
very  glad  we  all  were  when  we  shot  in  in  the  morning  Ix 
the  heads  of  the  Tamar,  and  at  once  found  oursel 
smooth  water.  We  had  a  strong  flood-tide  with  us,  i 
noon  we  were  at  Launceston.  Here  now  is  a  river  pi 
to  sail  upon.  The  Tamar  commences  at  the  point  wh< 
South  and  North  Esk  unite,  and  runs  to  the  Heads,  a  di 
of  forty-one  miles.  It  is  navigable  up  to  Launceston  f 
water  for  vessels  drawing  fourteen  feet.  My  notion 
ever,  is,  that  George  Town,  situated  four  miles  fro 
Heads,  which  has  a  good  harbour  for  any  size  vessel 
one  day  become  the  port  of  Launceston,  and  thus  th 
navigation  would  be  avoided,  a  matter  of  no  small  com 
tion  for  sailing  vessels,  and  even  for  large  steamers* 
this  can  take  place,  however,  the  railway  now  pr 
between  Launceston  and  Hobart  Town  will  have  to  Ix 
(120  miles),  and  another  also  between  Launceston  and< 
Town  (about  thirty-one  miles).  But  heaven  only 
when  these  railways  will  be  made,  for  the  TasmaniauE 
slow  people.  Their  first  railway  was  opened  yesterda; 
necting  Launceston  with  Deloraine,  a  distance  of  foi 
miles.  I  often  think  if  the  Californians  possessec 
mania,  how  soon  the  aspect  of  things  in  that  island 
change. 

I  went  to  Ballarat  on  the  15th,  and  paid  a  lengthene 
to  the  Black  Hill  mine,  which  has  been  one  of  the  most  1 
here.  It  belongs  to  a  company,  but  at  present  is  worl 
tribute ;  that  is,  it  is  worked  by  fifty  practical  minei 
have  the  use  and  benefit  of  the  efficient  crushing  apj 
erected  by  the  company,  driving  sixty  stamps,  and  in 


BALLARA T—BLA CK  HILL  MINE.  275 

tbej  render  to  the  company  12^  per  cent  of  the  gross  pro- 
ceeds of  the  mine.  The  claim  and  the  works  upon  it  are  in 
leility  let  to  one  man,  a  Welsh  miner,  upon  the  condition 
thtt  he  never  keeps  less  than  fifty  men  at  work  upon  it. 
The  mine  has  already  been  worked  to  the  depth  of  400  feet 
At  present  the  work  is  going  on  in  the  open,  and  is  reached 
throagh  a  long  tunnel  running  into  the  hill,  passing  right 
through  it  at  a  depth  of  about  seventy  feet  below  the  crown 
of  the  hill,  coming  out  at  the  opposite  side.  The  .hill  con- 
fists  of  sand,  soft  sandstone,  and  clayey  slate,  streaked  in 
Btny  places  like  the  sandhills  in  the  Isle  of  Wight  near  the 
Keedles.  Intermixed  with  this  conglomerate  are  veins  of 
furtz,  and  it  is  in  these  veins  of  quartz  the  gold  is  found. 
The  miners  are  quarrying  this  hill,  working  in  the  open,  and 
fir  one  ton  of  quartz  they  take  out,  along  with  it  they  have 
io  remove  at  least  twenty  tons  of  sand.  Blasting  and  the 
pick  do  the  work ;  by  blasting  they  shake  large  masses, 
ind  then  work  it  down  with  the  pick.  The  gold-bearing  ore 
11  then  selected  from  the  mass,  put  into  a  small  truck,  and 
ptssed  through  the  tunnel  upon  a  tramway,  and  emptied  into 
the  shooting  that  feeds  the  stamping-mill.  The  '^  mullock,'* 
ist]ie  miners  call  it,  is  put  into  trucks  also,  and  carried  away 
in  mother  direction.  A  horse  does  all  the  hauling.  About 
iixtf  tons  of  ore  is  crushed  daily  in  this  claim,  producing  at 
irnent  the  small  amount  of  one  pennyweight  of  gold  per 
Ion — giving  to  the  fifty  men  employed  3s.  5d.  each  as  his 
diflj  wages.  This  is  not  considered  remunerative  wages  by 
tlie  miners,  and  the  work  would  be  abandoned  by  them  did 
iliej  not  hope  and  expect  an  increase  in  the  yield.  Two 
pennyweights  a  ton  would  give  them  9s.  a  day  at  least,  for 
dtt  expense  of  extracting  the  two  pennyweights  would  be  no 
\  petter  than  they  incur  in  extracting  the  one  per  ton.  How 
nietorn  of  one  pennyweight  per  ton  can  give  a  wage  of  3s. 
U.  per  day  is  difficult  at  first  to  understand,  but  the  ore  is 
not  very  hard,  and  is  consequently  quickly  and  easily  crushed. 
I  visited  many  of  the  alluvial  workings,  which  abound  every* 
where  in  and  around  Ballarat  In  going  to  the  Black  Hill 
>nne,  I  crossed  over  what  is  called  the  Black  Hill  Plain, 
where  one  man  with  his  sons,  two  little  boys,  were  working. 
Ike  man  had  aunk  a  hole  four  feet  by  two,  and  at  a  depth 


r 


276  BALLARAT, 

of  twenty-two  feet  had  reached  the  gold-bearing  strata- 
debris  it  might  be  called ;  and  as  he  filled  a  backet 
this  debris,  the  boys  wound  it  up  with  a  winch  to  the 
face  and  threw  it  into  a  heap,  and  when  there  was  suffif 
oat  to  fill  the  wash-tubs,  the  miner  came  up  and  waslu 
out.  During  the  day  he  would  wash  out  nine  or  ten  of  1 
tubs,  holding  perhaps  fifty  or  sixty  gallons  of  dirt  at 
washing.  Oat  of  the  previous  three  days,  he  told  me 
first  two  had  given  him  nothing ;  the  third  gave  him 
worth  of  gold.  Whilst  I  looked  on,  a  tubful  of  dirt 
washed,  and  yielded  5s.  worth,  in  fine  grains  of  a  beai 
colour,  and  so  pure  that  it  sells  for  £4  an  ounce. 

In  digging,  when  the  miners  reach  the  pay-dirt  in 
holes,  they  begin  driving  right  and  left  horizontally, 
generally  have  to  prop  up  the  ceiling  with  wooden  sup] 
Sometimes  the  ground  is  so  hard  that  it  does  not  need  ; 
ping  up.  K  the  quantity  of  gold  found  warrants  their 
tinning  the  work,  they  do  so  so  long  as  they  have  sofi 
air  in  the  gallery.  When  the  air  is  done,  they  come  ; 
to  the  surface,  and  begin  a  fresh  hole  ;  so  they  proceed. 
these  alluvial  diggings,  they  tell  me,  the  stones  of  qi 
which  are  always  water-worn,  seldom  or  ever  contain  j 
the  precious  metal  being  found  in  the  mass  of  mudd] 
in  which  the  debris  of  quartz  is  buried.  This  plain  fomu 
of  the  Black  Hill  claim,  and  the  miner  whom  I  fonnd  tli 
the  only  man  at  work  upon  it.  The  owners  of  the  ] 
Hill  claim  had  permitted  him  to  try  his  luck  there ;  at 
so  he  told  me.  From  Ballarat  I  paid  a  visit  to  the 
Philip  mine  at  Clunes,  some  forty  miles  from  Bal 
This  establishment,  if  not  the  largest,  is  the  most  effici 
managed  in  Victoria.  The  work  in  all  its  branches  is 
ried  on  with  a  view  to  thorough  efiectiveness,  and  with  i 
cision  unknown  in  any  other  establishment.  The  ore 
the  different  leads,  and  they  are  at  work  upon  sever 
kept  separate,  so  that  they  always  know,  in  case  of  a  ( 
nution  or  an  increase  in  the  yield,  in  which  of  the  leac 
alteration  arises.  Among  the  ores  at  this  mine,  there  is  a 
tain  amount  of  pyrites.  This  is  always  separated  and  cal( 
before  being  submitted  to  the  action  of  quicksilver, 
stamps  are  kept  moving  by  the  very  rapid  motion  of  a 


THE  YARRA.  277 

Tolfing  shaft.  There  are,  I  believe,  some  eighty  at  work, 
and  there  are  some  of  what  they  call  chambers-crackers  used 
ibr  the  most  compact  and  hardest  of  the  ore.  Of  all  descrip- 
tions of  ore,  they  crash,  I  was  told,  some  1300  tons  weekly, 
podacing  at  present  320  ounces  of  gold,  or  between  six  and 
eight  pennyweights  to  the  ton.  There  are  some  250  men 
onployed  at  the  mine. 

28rt. — My  room  in  this  hotel  looks  out  upon  Flinders 
Street.  In  my  front  I  have  the  fish-market  and  the  Sand- 
ridge  railway  station,  and  beyond  is  the  swamp,  and  the 
dfer  running  through  it.  Somewhat  lower  down  are  estab^ 
lished  those  most  abominable  stinking  factories,  bone-crush- 
ing, wool-washing,  and  from  which  I  am  receiving  to«day 
[there  being  a  light  breeze  from  the  westward)  a  most 
nckening  smell.  How  the  sensible  people  of  Melbourne  can 
Mmtinue  to  endure  this  abomination,  so  detrimental  to  health, 
ii  i  mystery  to  me.  The  fish-market,  too,  often  sends  into 
my  room,  with  a  southerly  wind,  odours  not  particularly 
iioe;  not  the  wholesome  smell  of  fresh  fish — of  that  I  am 
the  last  man  to  complain — but  the  fetid  smell  of  a  dirty  fish- 
market  in  a  warm  climate.  From  reading  the  papers,  I 
ihoald  gather  that  the  parties  (there  are  three  of  them  just 
iK)w,  I  think)  in  the  House  of  Assembly  are  pretty  equally 
bihttioedy  and  vested  interests,  however  stinking  they  may  be, 
t&d  a  powerful  support  there ;  and  one  of  the  consequences 
of  this  state  of  things  is,  I  should  think,  that  the  royal 
eoounission  issued,  I  don't  know  when,  to  inquire  into  and 
iqK)rt  upon  the  poisonous  nuisances  on  the  Yarra,  is  likely 
to  torn  out  a  dead  letter.  The  members  of  the  Government, 
i&  order  to  sustain  themselves,  are  obliged  to  court  the  sup- 
port of,  and  to  cringe  to,  men  whom  they  utterly  de- 
spise, whose  doctrine  of  protection  to  nuisances  and  class 
numnfactures  they  would  certainly  repudiate  if  they  could, 
retaining  possession  at  the  same  time  of  the  loaves  and  fishes 
<tf  office.  Inside  the  House,  the  members  have  just  been  salaried, 
in  the  hope,  according  to  some  people,  that  £300  a  year  will 
|ittke  them  more  strict.  Outside  the  House  the  gold-mining 
^terest  is  so  powerful  that  the  2s.  6d.  an  ounce  levied  on 
P>ld  exported  (or  produced)  has  been  given  up,  and  a  5s.  licence- 
^  levied  in  its  place  on  ail  alluvial  claims,  and  a  trifling  rent 


278  THE  MERSEY. 

upon  quartz-reef  leased  claims.  The  licence-fee,  I  am  told,  is 
now  seldom  paid,  nnless  the  claim  turns  ont  to  be  rich,  and 
the  rent  recovered  from  leased  reef-claims  produces  a  yerj 
small  amount  indeed ;  so  the  GK)vernmenty  forced  to  find  i 
revenue  by  some  means  or  other,  have  had  recourse  to  heavy 
protective  duties,  of  which,  I  have  no  doubt,  the  Ftemier 
himself  fully  acknowledges  the  suicidal  policy.  Bat  whtt 
can  the  poor  man  do  ?  He  cannot  be  expected  to  give  up 
office,  and  the  loaves  and  fishes  thereto  belonging;  that 
would  be  asking  too  much  of  him.  Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is 
really  to  be  hoped  he  will  not  give  up  office ;  for,  from  whit 
I  can  gather,  there  is  no  politician  at  present  in  the  fore- 
most ranks  who  is  better  able,  though  he  may  be  unsiie- 
cessful,  to  battle  the  watch  with  his  unscrupulous  and  hnngij 
opponents,  who,  if  they  got  into  power,  would,  by  the  insane 
measures  of  high  protective  duties,  and  throwing  difficulties 
in  the  way  of  immigration,  do  much  to  retard  the  growth  of 
this  young  country  towards  wealth  and  power. 

March  5,  the  Mersey. — I  am  on  my  way  from  Circnlir 
Head  towards  Launceston,  but  we  rest  here  to-day,  being 
Sunday,  and  the  captain's  wife  and  family  reside  here.  I 
started  after  breakfast  to  go  to  church,  but  found  the  edifice 
shut  up;  so  I  steered  for  a  bell  which  was  being  rung, 
apparently  in  the  bush,  guessing  it  would  take  me  to  some 
place  of  worship.  As  I  neared  the  source  of  the  sound,  I 
discovered  a  small  building,  which  turned  out  to  be  a  Metho* 
dist.  meeting-house.  The  service  had  just  commenced  with 
a  hymn,  then  followed  an  extempore  prayer,  then  another 
hymn,  and  then  the  sermon.  The  preacher  was  a  young 
man ;  he  delivered  his  discourse  in  the  style  and  after  the 
manner  of  Little  Dorritt's  father.  There  were  some  sixty 
present,  principally  women  and  children. 

This  Mersey  river  is  about  100  yards  wide  opposite  the 
settlement.  On  tlie  bar  at  high  water  there  are  sixteen  to 
seventeen  feet  water.  The  river  is  navigable  for  seven  mileSj 
up  as  far  as  Latrobe.  There  are  many  houses  scattered 
about.  The  population  of  the  district  of  Port  Sorrell  is 
6082  souls.  The  settlement  on  the  west  bank  of  the  river 
is  called  Firnby,  and  on  the  east  side  Torquay.  The  Itf^ 
in  the  neighbourhood  is  rich,  and  this  district  is  one  of 


SYDNEY.  2}9 

lie  few  that  would  seem  to  be  making  progress  in  farming 
ndostrj. 

The  little  Pioneer  took  me  from  the  Mersey  to  Launceston, 
ifter  caUing  at  Port  Sorrell  (the  name  of  the  district),  ten 
niles  out  of  the  way,  in  twelve  hours.  The  tide  in  the 
Tamar  was  dead  against  us  the  whole  way,  or  we  should  have 
reached  Laxmceston  two  hours  sooner.  In  half  an  hour 
ifterwards  I  was  on  my  way  to  Hobart  Town,  having  just 
vriyed  at  Launceston  in  time  to  catch  the  coach,  and  the 
next  day  I  embarked  at  Hobart  Town  for  Sydney,  and 
•myed  there  on  the  10th — a  six  days'  passage.  Fine 
weather  all  the  way.  So  long  as  we  were  on  the  Tasmanian 
eoast  we  crept  close  alongshore,  and  then  stood  across  to 
Cape  Howe,  on  the  Australian  side.  We  kept  close  inshore, 
following  it  in  its  windings  all  the  way  to  Sydney.  There 
is  not  much  cultivated  ground  to  be  seen  from  shipboard, 
though  I  was  told,  inland,  from  one  point  we  passed,  there 
WIS  a  considerable  extent  of  dairy-farming  land,  the  produce 
of  which,  in  the  shape  of  butter,  eggs,  and  vegetables,  was 
diipped  by  steamers  at  the  little  port  of  Eden,  on  Twofold 
Bay,  for  Sydney. 

Sydney  Heads,  about  six  miles  from  the  principal  har- 
boor,  are  rough  perpendicular  cliffs.  The  port-side  on  enter- 
iog,  where  the  Dunbar  was  lost  some  years  ago,  one  man 
only  being  saved,  thrown  up  on  a  shelf  in  the  side  of  a  cliff, 
is  particularly  rough  and  inhospitable  looking.  The  harbour, 
composed  of  a  number  of  long  irregular  arms,  with,  I  believe, 
deep  water  throughout,  is  doubtless  very  commodious,  equal 
to  aDything  of  the  sort  in  Australia,  or  perhaps  anywhere 
olae.  The  town  is  scattered  about  on  the  heights  overlooking 
the  several  arms  or  inlets,  and  extending  down  to  the  water 
where  sloping  ground  makes  it  practicable.  The  weather  was 
&ie  as  we  steamed  up  the  bay,  and  the  town,  dotted  about 
••  the  houses  are,  has  a  very  pretty  appearance.  There  are 
thousands,  I  may  say,  of  the  Norfolk  Island  pine  planted  in 
^^  around  Sydney,  some  of  them  a  hundred  feet  high ;  they 
help  to  give  the  place  a  cheerful  appearance.  Sydney  is  a 
town  of  great  extent,  built  principally  of  sandstone,  and  con- 
taining a  population  of  100,000  inhabitants.  Our  first  visit 
^  to  the  museum,  a  creditable  establishment,  containing 


28o  SYDNEY, 

a  fair  collection  of  birds  and  beasts  particularly  well  set 
np,  a  pretty  fair  collection  of  mineralogical  specimens,  some 
shells,  a  good  many  skeletons,  some  well-prepared  Bpeci- 
mens  of  fish,  a  good  many  snakes  and  suchlike  reptiles  in 
spirits ;  of  coarse  there  is  any  amount  of  clubs  and  spears  firom 
the  islands ;  these  abound  in  almost  all  Australian  mnseum 
From  the  museum  we  went  to  the  Botanic  (hardens ;  tbej 
are  extensive,  and  tidily  kept.  A  limited  menagerie  is 
attached  to  these  gardens,  close  to  the  Sydney  Hyde  Park. 
On  Sunday  attended  divine  service  in  the  cathedral,  i 
newly-erected  building  of  sandstone,  but  very  small ;  aod 
inside  it  looks  like  a  baby  cathedral,  the  numerous  fitdngi 
thought  to  be  absolutely  necessary  for  a  cathedral  being 
all  huddled  together,  one  on  the  top  of  the  other,  leafing 
the  main  aisle  only  fourteen  feet  wide.  The  pavement 
of  the  main  aisle  is  very  elaborate,  and  does  not  m* 
respond  very  well  with  the  sandstone  pillars.  Neither  tbe 
organ  nor  the  singing  to  my  mind  was  much  to  boast  oC 
This  little  cathedral  is  thought  a  great  deal  of  by  the  Sydney 
people.  "  En  la  tierra  de  los  ciegos  el  tuerto  es  rey  "—in 
the  land  of  the  blind  he  who  squints  is  king.  The  uniTe^ 
sity  and  the  two  colleges  in  its  neighbourhood  are  respeetaUe 
edifices.  We  went  over  the  exhibition  building ;  it  is  empty 
just  now.  It  is  217  yards  long  and  forty-seven  yards  wide, 
and  a  good  height.  The  walls  are  of  brick,  and  look  well 
built,  but  the  doors  and  the  windows  are  all  tumbling  to 
pieces,  made,  as  they  seem  to  have  been,  of  green  wood.  The 
mint  is  a  well-conducted  establishment,  turning  out  on  tt 
average  some  50,000  sovereigns  a  month ;  gold  only  is  coined 
here.  The  mode  of  separating  silver  from  gold  by  intro- 
ducing into  the  crucible  containing  the  melted  mass  a  stream 
of  chlorine  gas,  which  forms  with  the  silver  a  chloride,  and 
remaining  in  a  fiuid  state  long  enough  to  admit  of  being 
poured  off'  after  the  gold  has  become  solidified,  is  the  inven- 
tion of  one  of  the  officers  of  the  Sydney  establishment  The 
sovereign,  which  is  now  alloyed  with  copper,  but  wasfo^ 
merly  with  silver,  is  stamped  and  the  edge  milled  by  a  single 
stroke  of  a  two-ton  die;  fifty-seven  sovereigns  are  turned 
out  finished  per  minute.  Although  we  had  no  introduction 
to  the  secretary,  after  a  very  little  delay  we  were  shown 


SYDNE  Y—NE  WCASTLE,  28 1 

thronghont  the  building,  and  witnessed  and  had  explained 
to  ns  the  whole  process  of  turning  a  bar  of  gold  into 
sovereigns.  We  paid  a  visit  to  a  pottery,  and  also  to  a 
glass-blower's  establishment,  both  upon  a  very  small  scale, 
particularly  the  latter,  where  nothing  is  attempted  beyond 
blowing  soda-water  and  other  small  bottles.  Both  the 
potter's  clay  and  the  argillaceous  sand,  found  on  the  spot, 
are,  they  say,  of  the  very  best  quality ;  a  pot  in  which  the 
composition  for  glass  is  melted  lasting  for  three  months  in 
constant  use. 

The  educational  establishments  are  numerous.  There  is 
one  common  school  close  to  our  hotel  attended  by  1800 
pupils — ^boys,  girls,  and  infants. 

On  the  13th  we  took  a  run  up  to  Newcastle  in  the  collier 

Maeedon^  distance  from   Sydney  seventy-five  miles.      We 

waited  for  daylight  to  enter  the  port,  that  we  might  be 

placed   at   once  under   a   shoot  for   receiving  coal.      The 

entrance  to  the  harbour  is  round  Nobby  Island.     Newcastle 

^  a  good  harbour.    Around  it  for  a  radius  of  eight  miles  are 

numerous  coal  pits  producing  good  coal,  sold  at  the  pit's 

mouth  at  7s.  6d.  the  ton,  and  put  on  board  ship  at  Ss.  8d. 

There  were  some  twenty  vessels  loading  when  we  arrived, 

and  half-a-dozen  more  came  in  with  us.     In  other  times, 

however,  before  the  system  of  protection  of  native  industry 

was  adopted  in  the  colony,  and  before  the  war,  Newcastle 

was  usually  crowded  with  vessels  seeking  return  cargoes  of 

coals  for  India,  China,  and  California.     The  heavy  restrictive 

duhes  now  levied  on  imports  have  so  curtailed  the  foreign 

^y  that  but  few  of  the  vessels  bringing  cargoes  to  the 

^^ony  are  avaDable   for  taking  coal.      The  Hunter  river, 

cu  Pong  ^p  ^^^  Newcastle,  is  navigable  for  good-sized 

2^f  ^  *«  far  as  Monteith,  twenty  miles. 

the     to     ^^^rne.—A  stroU  through  Paddy's  Market,  at 

BoD-^J^  ^^  ^urke  Street,  on  a  Saturday  night  is  amusing. 

Auit=z^  t    ^^®^*  ^tefi'^  ^  lined  with  public-houses,  oyster-shops, 

jjj^^^  ^^p8,  theatres,   polytechnics,  and  houses  of  entertain- 

niehii      -    *^^  ^^^  *°^   *^  ®^^  ^^  tastes ;  and  on  a  Saturday 

j^        ^^  ^^^onged  with  the  bone  and  sinew  of  Melbourne, 

q£  1     ^^d  feun^Q^     For  their  amusement  there  are  all  sorts 

^ces,     2^^  Chesp  Jack  is  there,  with  a  gaping  crowd 


282  PADDYS  MARKET. 

around  him ;  there  is  an  astronomer  who  indulges  yon  with 
a  peep  at  Japiter  through  a  fonrteen-feet  telescope,  supple- 
mented with    a  stand  upon  which  are  set  op  half-Hrdoien 
microscopes,  through  which,  among  other  wonders,  you  miy 
examine  ^^  a  bit  of  cheese  from  the  Falls  of  Niagara  in 
South  America  (!)  with  thousands  of  live  animals  in  it,  each 
one  carrying  on  its  back  bristles  as  long  as  the  third  joint 
of  the  middle  finger  of  the  showman's  right  hand/'  or  a  live 
flea  as  large  as  a  lobster;  or  you  may  try  your  muBcnlir 
power  against  a  buffer,  or  your  wind  by  a  blowing  apparatoB, 
to  test  the  strength  and  soundness  of  your  lungs ;  and  all 
for  3d.,  or  for  nothing,  if  you  don't  approve  of  these  wonden 
after  you  have  examined  them.     There  b,  too,  a  voluble 
Irishman  with    a   dozen   panoramic   views  of  the  siege  of 
Paris,  more  natural  than  the  siege  itself;  M.  Gkimbettaon 
a  balloon  ascending  above  the  walls  of  Paris ;  a  likeness  of 
Marie  Antoinette,  taken  just  before  her  execution  after  the 
French    Revolution    of   1792;    there  is    Moltke,  too,  and 
Bismarck,  and  the  Emperor  of  the  Germans  ;  all  for  another 
3d.     There  is  pea-shooting,  and  nine-pins,  and  fruit  and 
vegetables,    all   mixed   up   together    in    Paddy's    Mark^ 
Apples,  pears,  plums,  and  pine-apples,  at  from  Id.  to  3d. 
a  pound ;  and  grapes,  black  and  white,  at  the  same  price 
in   any  quantity ;  cabbages,  very  good,  at  from  Id.  to  2d. 
a  head ;  pease  and  French  beans,  8  to  10  pounds  for  Is. ;  and 
onions,  16  pounds  for  Is. ;  pig's  cheek  and  cheese,  boots  and 
shoes,  old  clothes  and  new,  frying-pans  and  steelyards,  and 
every  other  mortal  thing  either  for  the  inner  or  the  outer 
man,  or  to  fit  up  a  house  from  top  to  bottom.     Cucumbers 
and  melons  in  great  profusion,  and  guinea-pigs  and  cocka- 
toos, and  a  hundred  other  sorts  of  birds,  and  all  mixed  op 
together ;  and  what  strikes  one  is,  that  the  great  balk  of 
both  buyers  and  sellers  are  from  the  Emerald  Isle. 

26f^,  6'e^wcfay.— r-Went  to  church  and  heard  Mr  Chase. 
I  wonder  at  what  age  I  shall  arrive  before  I  commence  to 
sing  at  church  ?  for  I  begin  to  think  we  will  all  come  to  it 
if  we  only  live  long  enough.  Mr  N.  in  the  later  year* 
of  his  life  took  to  singing  in  church,  though  he  had  not  the 
slightest  notion  of  music,  and  had  no  more  ear  than  a 
marling-spike.      In  the  same  pew  with  me  to-day  sat  an 


EMU  BAY.  283 

old  gentleman  who  was  very  officious ;  he  would  poke  his 
Bible  under  mj  nose  to  force  me  to  read  the  text,  though 
the  print  was  so  small  that  I  could  not  make  out  a  letter  of 
it  He  too  sang,  and  clearly  had.  only  lately  taken  to  it ; 
his  voice  was  like  a  cracked  kettle,  and  his  singing  otherwise 
most  discordant  Surely  these  old  men  who  take  to  singing 
so  late  in  life  must  do  so  under  the  notion  that  unless  they 
can  sing  they  won't  be  admitted  into  heaven  I  It  must  be 
some  feeling  of  that  sort  influences  them  in  the  attempt  to 
take  heaven  by  storm,  as  it  were.  I  hope  I  may  never  reach 
that  pass. 

%lth. — ^Another  trip  to  Tasmania.  Embarked  in  the 
Denvent  for  Launceston,  and  arrived  there  after  a  smooth 
passage  of  twenty-five  hours.  Some  five-and-twenty  pas- 
seogers,  and  among  them  a  gentleman  and  his  wife  bringing 
over  the  body  of  their  son,  a  boy  of  eight  years  of  age,  who 
died  at  the  Fort  Philip  Hotel. 

iOtL — I  embarked  in  my  old  friend  the  Pioneer  for  Emu 
Bay.  The  weather  was  fine,  and  hardly  any  wind.  We 
reached  the  Heads  at  2.30  p.m.,  calling  at  George  Town  on 
the  way.  When  we  got  outside  we  found  a  strong  breeze 
from  the  westward  and  a  tumbling  sea;  so  that  it  was 
6  p.x.  before  we  arrived  at  the  Mersey.  Had  some  fishing  as 
we  came  along ;  the  barracuda  plentiful  all  along  the  coast. 
The  next  day,  after  calling  at  the  Forth,  the  Leven,  and 
the  Penguin,  we  arrived  at  Emu  Bay. 

April  8tk, — After  remaining  in  this  neighbourhood  for  a 
week,  I  turned  my  face  again  towards  Launceston.  I  made 
the  journey  by  land,  by  the  coast  as  far  as  the  Don,  and 
then  turning  inland  on  to  Latrobe  and  Deloraine,  and  thence 
on  to  Launceston.  The  Leven,  the  Forth,  and  the  Don  are 
all  prettily  situated,  and  take  their  names  from  the  rivers 
upon  the  banks  of  which  they  are  located ;  more  particularly 
the  Leven.  The  view  from  the  inn  would  make  a  pretty 
picture,  with  its  busy  ivharf  in  the  foreground,  followed  by 
the  river  winding  through  a  richly-wooded  country  with  a 
conically-shaped  mountain  in  the  distance.  Latrobe,  how- 
ever, is  the  most  flourishing,  and  by  far  the  most  populous 
settlement  hereabouts.  It  is  situated  on  the  Mersey,  about 
seven  miles  above  Torquay,  and  may  be  reached  by  vessels 


284  LATROBE—DELORAINE. 

drawing  seven  or  eight  feet  water.  I  slept  at  Latrobe,  tod 
was  in  the  saddle  at  six  next  morning  on  my  way  to  Delo- 
raine.  We  missed  onr  road  on  starting  from  the  inn,  and 
had  to  ride,  consequently,  for  eleven  miles  over  a  newly-com- 
menced road  before  coming  to  its  junction  with  the  old  roid. 
This  new  cut  is  made  to  benefit  certain  landowners  throng 
whose  property  it  runs,  and  who  are  strongly  represented  in 
the  township.  The  timber  is  cleared  away  root  and  bnndi 
throagh  this  new  cut,  half  a  chain  wide ;  a  good  deal  of  the 
levelling  is  done,  and  part  of  the  road  is  metalled,  the  result  of 
one  year's  work.  At  the  Junction  Inn,  fourteen  miles  from 
Latrobe  and  the  same  distance  from  Deloraine,  we  gave  oor 
horses  a  rest  and  a  feed  of  oats  whilst  we  breakfasted.  We 
reached  Deloraine  at  one  o'clock.  A  considerable  extent  of 
land  skirting  the  road  is  cleared,  or  partially  cleared,  between 
the  inn  and  Deloraine.  This  latter  place  contains  some  800  in- 
habitants. The  railway  to  Launceston  has  just  been  opened 
for  traffic.  I  started  by  an  excursion  train  filled  to  OTe^ 
flowing ;  the  ordinary  compartments,  meant  to  carry  eight 
passengers,  to-day  had  to  accommodate  a  dozen.  At  the 
station  one  man  made  a  desperate  effort  to  obtain  his  ticket 
a  full  half-hour  before  the  ticket-clerk,  who  was  employed 
on  other  matters  on  the  platform,  thought  it  necessary  to 
begin  issuing.  This  man  followed  the  clerk  everywhere 
demanding  a  ticket,  and  vociferating  that  he  was  a  share- 
holder, and  therefore  entitled  to  be  served  at  once.  This  is 
the  first  and  only  railway  yet  opened  in  Tasmania.  For  this 
country,  the  land  seems  fairly  cultivated  between  Deloraine 
and  Launceston,  though  on  a  great  part  of  what  is  considered 
cleared  land,  from  ten  to  fifty  trees  to  an  acre  are  still  stand- 
ing, or  about  that  number  of  trunks.  All  along  the  coast 
from  Emu  Bay  to  Latrobe,  thirty-four  miles,  there  is  » 
sprinkling  of  what  is  called  cleared  land,  which  means  thai 
the  brushwood  is  cleared  away  and  the  large  trees  rung.  ^ 
this  state  the  land  admits  of  ploughing.  Every  gale  of  wind 
blows  down  some  of  the  large  rung  timber,  much  to  the 
disgust  of  the  farmer,  for  he  then,  as  a  matter  of  neceaai^i 
has  to  incur  the  expense  of  removing  the  timber  from  bis 
land.  They  do  not  fall,  however,  very  fast;  for  although 
Emu  Bay  is  an  old  settlement,  there  is  hardly  an  acre  ^ 


RAIL  WA  Y  TO  HO  BAR  T  TO  WN.  285 

leared  farming  land  in  the  vicinity  that  has  not  still  some 
en  to  twenty  trees  standing  npon  it. 

The  gange  of  the  contemplated  line  of  railway  between 
[Mneeston  and  Hobart  Town  is  five  feet  three  inches ; 
Kierage  cost  the  mile  £8000,  besides  land  compensation.  The 
pantity  of  land  required  would  average  eight  acres  to  a 
nOe. 

Summary  of  the  traffic  and  revenue  derivable  therefrom  on 
the  main  line  of  road  from  Launceston  to  Hobart  Town  for 
I  year,  from  statistics  compiled  by  Joseph  Penny  in  1869 — 

Heavy  traffic,  20,715  tons            ....  ^£9,854  13  0 

Light  traffic,  passenger,  2j^.  per  head  per  mile,  38,629  15  5 

Wool,  1453  tons,  6il  per  ton  per  mile,                .  1,390    6  0 

Hawkers, 362  18  0 

£50,237  12    5 

9rt, — I  am  waiting  to  take  the  Derwent  for  Melbourne. 
This  morning  I  attended  divine  service  in  St  John's  Church ; 
it  was  well  filled,  a  large  proportion  of  the  congregation  being 
yoQDg  women,  full  of  health  and  vigour.  Indeed,  one  is 
strack  by  the  number  of  young  women  and  children  one 
iDeets  with  in  Tasmania,  all  teeming  with  excess  of  health. 
With  good  beef  at  3d.,  and  good  mutton  at  2d.  a  pound,  they 
tte  all  well  fed,  and  a  good  climate  added  thereto  cannot  but 
i&ake  a  vigorous  and  healthy  population.  Unfortunately  there 
is  no  employment  for  the  young  men  in  Tasmania,  so  they 
d€8ert  the  place  at  an  early  age  for  Victoria  and  the  other 
Australian  colonies,  leaving  behind  them  a  large  excess  of 
females,  old  men,  and  children. 

Melbourne. — I  arrived  on  the  morning  of  the  12th.  In 
tiie  evening  of  13th  I  started  by  train  to  pay  a  visit  to 
Castlemaine  and  Echuca.  Castlemaine  is  a  worn-out  mining 
town,  with  half  the  houses  shut  up,  and  very  little  digging 
going  on  there.  Sandhurst,  formerly  called  Bendigo,  is  a 
"iore  thriving-looking  place,  but  not  at  all  equal  to  what  it 
^  a  few  years  ago.  Echuca,  on  the  Victorian  side  of  the 
^^inay,  opposite  to  Moama  on  the  New  South  Wales  side, 
^9^  which  there  are  some  fifty  steamers  or  more  employed, 
principally  in  taking  supplies  to,  and  bringing  wool  from, 
^  squatters'  estates  situated  on  both  sides  of  the  river. 
^^  Murray  is  not  over  thirty  or  forty  yards  broad  at  Echuca. 


286      THE  MURRAY^KING  GEORGES  SOUND. 

We  crossed  it  on  a  bridge  of  boats.  At  times  I  am  told  it 
rises  sixty  feet — that  is^  in  great  and  rare  floods — swamping 
the  surrounding  country,  pretty  nearly  a  dead  flat  for  nuaf 
miles,  and  causing  great  destruction  of  property  and  loss  of 
life  at  times.  It  has  the  appearance  now  of  a  muddy  insig- 
nificant river,  though  still  deep  in  the  middle.  The  bsnb 
are  high  on  either  side.  It  is  navigable  in  all  its  extent  lor 
about  2000  miles,  from  Albury  to  Adelaide.  The  Moxrim- 
bridge,  a  tributary  of  the  Murray,  is  also  navigable  for  some 
400  miles  from  the  Murray. 

On  the  23d  I  embarked  on  board  a  P.  and  0.  boat  for 
Galle.  The  economy  of  this  ship  is  managed  very  comfort- 
ably so  far  as  the  passengers  are  concerned,  and  otherwise 
also  I  believe.  As  for  the  craft  herself,  she  is  too  low  in  tho 
water,  and  so  far  we  have  not  been  able  to  open  our  cabin 
buirs-eyes,  and  to  all  appearance  we  may  not  be  able  to  open 
them  between  this  and  Galle ;  for  besides  carrying  her  porti 
very  low  down,  she  rolls  like  a  Dutch  dolL  She  is  big 
enough  certainly,  1700  tons,  flush  deck,  which  necessitates 
a  low  saloon,  and  brig-rigged.  She  has  a  motley  crew  of 
Lascars,  Manilla  men,  and  South  Sea  Islanders,  the  pet^ 
officers  being  Europeans,  which  I  believe  is  always  the  cue 
on  board  these  ships. 

We  arrived  at  King  George's  Sound  on  the  afternoon  of 
the  29th  ApriL  The  first  three  days  out  we  had  strong  bead 
winds  and  a  good  deal  of  sea ;  the  last  three,  variable  winds, 
but  still  rough  weather,  no  bulPs-eyes  open.  The  moment 
we  arrived  we  hauled  alongside  the  Company's  hulk,  and  be- 
gan coaling,  working  all  night,  and  finished  about  six  o'clodc 
next  morning,  taking  on  board  300  tons  coals.  This  harbour 
is  spacious  and  landlocked.  We  found  the  steamer  fiom 
Adelaide  here ;  she  had  arrived  the  night  before,  bringing  u 
three  passengers,  who  reported  having  encountered  a  cyclflW 
the  day  before,  which  obliged  them  to  keep  sailing  in  a 
circle  for  more  than  a  couple  of  hours,  keeping  head  to  wind 
all  the  time.  As  soon  as  we  could  get  a  boat  we  landed  to 
post  letters  and  stretch  our  legs.  A  long  wooden  wharf  cob* 
ducted  us  into  the  heart  of  the  settlement,  a  growing  plao^ 
but  nothing  much  at  present.  No  cultivation  in  ^ 
immediate  vicinity  of  the  settlement,  but  some  fiarmSi  I  was 


KING  GEORGES  SOUND'-^NATIVES.  287 

told,  jat  over  the  hills  which  lie  roundabout,  and  a  good 
sprinkling  of  sheep-runs  in  the  back  country.  A  small  gold 
rash  took  pliEU^e  here  to  a  place  some  distance  off  a  couple  of 
months  ago,  but  nothing  of  much  importance  has  yet  been 
discovered.  Shipments  to  some  extent  of  a  white  kind  of 
sandalwood  are  made  in  vessels  that  bring  coal  for  the  P. 
and  0.  boats.  These  colliers,  the  P.  and  0.  boats,  and  the 
branch  steamer  from  Adelaide,  with  an  occ&sional  coaster, 
constitute  the  shipping  trade  of  King  Gteorge^s  Sound.  The 
▼ool  shipped  here  goes  on  to  Adelaide,  there  to  be  transhipped 
for  England. 

In  our  ramble  on  shore  we  met  with  several  of  the  natives 
of  both  sexes.  The  men  were  pretty  well  clothed,  but  the 
women  were  in  the  filthiest  of  rags,  got  up  perhaps  to  excite 
compassion,  for  these  last  were  bold  beggars.  As  we  saw 
them  they  were  disgusting  objects,  though  really  not  possess- 
ing bad  features,  their  skins  very  dark,  and  of  fair  stature. 
They  all  spoke  a  little  English,  sufficient  to  enable  them  to 
beg.  I  bought  a  boomerang  from  one  of  the  men  for  Is, 
He  wanted  Ss.  for  it.  It  is  made  of  a  hard  dark-coloured 
wood  resembling  rosewood,  and  which  they  called  raspberry- 
jam-wood,  because  supposed  to  taste  something  like  that 
preserve.  Mr  W.,  we  were  told,  a  rich  resident  employ^,  had 
returned  only  a  few  weeks  before  from  Melbourne,  married 
a  girl  of  nineteen,  he  being  seventy,  and  died  suddenly  the 
day  before  we  arrived,  so  that  the  young  girl  found  herself 
very  unexpectedly  transformed  from  a  penniless  but  attrac- 
tive girl  into  a  rich  lady  without  any  incumbrance.  How 
such  a  girl  would  be  envied  by  her  compeers  I  We  had 
a  doctor  on  board,  a  passenger,  well  dried  up  by  a  long 
residence  in  Java  among  the  Dutch,  who  talked  very  wisely 
about  the  fate  that  had  befallen  the  old  gentleman  at  King 
George's  Sound  for  his  temerity  in  marrying  a  girl  of 
nineteen. 

Well,  after  having  posted  our  letters,  bought  3s.  of 
Western  Australia's  postage  stamps  for  A.,  I  visited  a  bar, 
and  as  in  duty  bound  liquored  up  with  my  companions  in 
brandy  not  unlike  aquafortis,  passed  some  time  in  chaffing 
the  native  women-beggars,  and  walked  to  the  extremity  of 
the  settlement  over  a  road  leading  to  the  furthest  end  of  it. 


288  MELBOURNE  TO  GALLE. 

destined  to  become  some  day,  when  lined  with  hoases,  a 
Ktreet,  we  tamed  and  wended  oar  way  back  ^  the  long 
wooden  wharf,  where  we  found  our  boat,  the  crew  of  which 
consisted  of  an  old  lag  from  Tasmania  and  a  young  fellow 
from  Winchester,  sexton  and  clerk  of  the  Episcopal  chnrch 
at  King  George's  Sound.  As  these  worthies  rowed  towards 
the  steamer,  the  lag  gave  us  a  bit  only  of  his  history,  and  the 
clerk  of  the  church  recounted  to  us  the  death  and  burial  of 
Mr  W.  already  alluded  to.  At  7  kML  next  day  we  steamed 
away  from  our  quiet  anchorage  at  the  Sound,  and  in  a  couple 
of  hours  afterwards  we  were  plunging  and  rolling  in  a  roagh 
sea,  fighting  our  way,  with  our  head  pointing  for  Ceylon, 
against  a  strong  N.  W.  wind,  which  lasted  more  or  less  strong 
until  we  got  into  32''  S.,  when  it  shifted  to  S.W.,  and  so 
continued  until  we  took  the  trade  in  25"",  and  carried  it  with 
us  until  within  four  or  five  degrees  of  the  line,  when,  in  these 
doldrum  latitudes,  it  became  yariable,  with  squalls  and  rain. 
Eleven  knots  an  hour  soon  carried  us  out  of  the  doldrums 
and  across  the  line,  and  on  10th  we  ran  slap  against  the 
S.W.  monsoon,  which  had  seemingly  just  commenced.  It  was 
accompanied  with  a  good  deal  of  sea,  sharp  squalls,  and  a  fair 
amount  of  rain,  serving  to  unsettle  again  the  stomachs  of  our 
more  sensitive  passengers,  and  to  keep  them  in  a  recumbent 
position  until  we  ran  into  smooth  water  in  Ghdle  on  13th  day 
of  May  at  4  p.m. 

No  boat  had  ever  before  brought  so  many  passengers  from 
Australia.  We  had  thirty-two  first-class  adult  passengers, 
besides  a  lot  of  children,  and  a  dozen  or  more  of  second-class. 
We  had  squatters,  merchants,  shipmasters,  coffee-planters, 
miners,  and  professionals,  with  a  sprinkling  of  the  upper 
^^  ten  thousand."  We  had  not  a  single  military  man  or 
clergyman  on  board ;  and  notwithstanding  these  two  elements 
were  wanting,  we  had  good -humour  on  board  from  the 
beginning  to  the  end  of  the  passage. 

There  was  one  person  on  board  whom  they  called  a  mail- 
agent,  whose  duty  it  was  to  receive  the  bags  of  letters  from 
the  postmaster  at  Galle,  and  to  deliver  them  up  at  the  post- 
offices  at  Adelaide,  or  at  King  (George's  Sound  for  Adelaide, 
at  Melbourne,  and  at  Sydney^  and  to  receive  letter-bags  fit)m 
these  three  places  on  the  return  voyage,  and  to  deliver  them 


MAIL-AGENT.  289 

t  CkJle;  and  for  this  intellectual  employment  I  was 
ned  ll#  was  in  receipt  of  £350  a  year.  The  purser,  « 
workiiilf  man,  would  have  been  very  glad,  I  am  quite 
to  have  done  all  this  duty  of  the  mail-agent  for  £50  a 
or  eren  for  a  much  leii9  sum. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

Bail  to  Kaady— Ooffae-plantationi— Sanatoriam — Soonery — Chinchona  doing  well— 
Oiniiainoii-nrdeni^Be  venae — Population— Beligioni — Colombo — Coffee-itorei 
— ^Wagea— Sread-fmit  and  other  trees — Cingalese  traders  great  cheats— ^ir  £. 
Tonnant  and  the  elephant — Leare  for  Sues — Aden  increasing— Passengers- 
Fort  Said— Canal — Dredging— Will  have  to  be  widened  by  John  Bull — ^Bevenaa 
of  cimal— Jaffa— Jemsslem— Schools— Best  time  to  visit  Jerosalem- Polish 
Jews  cultiTating— Population  of  Jerusalem— Alexandria— Marseilles— Home. 

The  day  after  arriyal  at  Galle  I  took  my  place  in  the  mail- 
coach  for  Colombo,  a  drive  of  seventy-six  miles  over  a  good 
road,  and  through  a  forest  of  cocoa-nut  palms.  I  remained 
two  days  at  Colombo,  which  all  the  world  knows  is  on  the 
coast  The  road  to  it  skirts  the  shore  in  all  its  length.  It 
contains  now,  they  say,  a  population  of  91,000  souls — 
Buddhists,  demon-worshippers,  and  Gentoos,  of  which  the 
population  is  principally  composed.  I  counted  upwards  of 
twenty  vessels  at  anchor  in  the  roadstead ;  seven  of  them  were 
loading  coffee  for  Europe.  The  fresh-water  lakes  about 
Colombo  add  much  to  the  beauty  of  the  place. 

May  15tA. — I  started  by  rail  for  Kandy,  seventy  miles. 
The  rail  for  the  first  forty  or  fifty  miles  runs  through  dense 
jungle.  Wherever  there  is  a  bit  of  land  void  of  jungle,  it 
has  been  turned  into  paddy-fields.  The  latter  part  of  the 
road,  for  some  twenty  or  thirty  miles,  is  upon  higher  ground, 
and  for  about  twelve  miles  has  a  gradient  of  one  in  forty- 
five,  and  passes  through  very  picturesque  country,  winding 
round  the  slopes  of  hills,  with  a  valley  below  from  500  to 
1000  feet  or  more  deep,  all  under  paddy  cultivation;  whilst 
you  get  a  glimpse  of  the  coffee-plantations  showing  them- 
selves towards  the  tops  of  the  hills.  Kandy  possesses  some 
good  European  buildings,  and  in  the  very  centre  of  the  place 
is  a  prettily-shaped  artificial  lake,  some  two  and  a  quarter  miles 
in  circumference,  with  a  well-kept  drive  round  it  Surrounded 
by  hills,  Kandy  has   rather   a   striking   appearance.    The 


NEWERA  ELLIA-^CULTIVATION  OF  CEYLON.  291 

eight  above  the  sea  is  1600  or  1700  feet.    There  are  two 
ft68able  hotels. 

Newera  Ellia  is  a  favoiudte  sanatorium  for  people  living 
pon  the  coast;  it  is  forty-eight  miles  from  Kandy,  and 
tands  6200  feet  above  the  sea,  and  4800  feet  above  Kandy. 
\  proceeded  to  pay  it  a  visit,  in  a  mail-cart  as  far  as  Ram- 
)oddey  thirty-four  miles,  and  the  remainder  of  the  journey, 
Dot  finding  a  horse  or  a  vehicle,  I  did  on  foot,  fourteen 
miles,  a  cooly  carrying  my  scant  luggage.  The  road  is  first- 
rate  all  the  way.  Newera  Ellia  is  in  the  midst  of  hills, 
the  highest  of  which  is  Pedrotallagalla,  8295  feet  above 
the  station.  The  place  is  new ;  there  is  a  sprinkling  of 
hongalows  in  it,  and  one  tolerable  hotel ;  it  is  a  desirable 
residence  for  three  or  four  months  in  the  year.  They  tell 
me  the  children  come  up  from  the  coast  pale  and  wan  look- 
ing, and  in  a  month  or  two  they  return  with  roses  on  their 
d^eks. 

From  Peradenia,  four  miles  from  Kandy,  to  Bambodde, 
the  road  leads  through  very  pretty  scenery,  water  trickling 
down  the  hills  everywhere;  but  from  Rambodde  the  view 
from  the  Best  House  is  particularly  striking.  You  look  out 
OTer  a  vale  of  paddy-fields  bordered  by  hills,  the  sides  of 
which  are  covered  to  a  great  extent  with  coffee-plantations, 
and  over  some  bare  precipices,  the  water  coming  down  from 
•ndi  a  height  and  in  sufficient  quantity  to  make  some 
three  or  four  respectable  waterfalls.  At  night  the  whole 
atmosphere  was  alive  with  fireflies. 

The  cultivation  of  Ceylon  consists  of  about — rice,  60,000 
acres;  millet  and  maize,  250,000;  cocoa-nuts,  200,000; 
palmyras  and  areca-nuts,  60,000 ;  total  of  palms,  260,000 ; 
coSee,  200,000.  Coffee  is  cultivated  in  Ceylon  from  an 
devation  of  1500  tp  4500  feet;  a  medium  height  is  pre- 
fared.  The  reserve  of  forest  in  connection  with  cultiva- 
tion of  coffee,  150,000  acres ;  Government  hill-forest  suit- 
Ale  for  coffee,  tea,  and  chinchona,  500,000  acres  ; 
tobacco,  aromatic  grasses,  cotton,  &c.  &c.,  70,000  acres; 
orchard  cultivation,  60,000  acres;  cinnamoD,  15,000 acres, 
^otal  under  cultivation,  1,455,000  acres;  or  at  most,  less 
^  one  and  a  half  million  acres,  less  than  one-tenth  of  the 
*^  of  the  whole  island. 


292     CULTIVATION  OF  CEYLON— POPULATION. 

Coffee  grows  about  the  native  huts,  and  bears  berries  at 
sea-level.    There  are  two  or  three  plantations  as  low  down 
as  600  feet,  and  a  good  many  at  an  elevation  of  1000  feet 
There  are  also  plantations  at  an  altitude  of  5000  feet  and 
higher,  but  the  true  coffee  zone  runs  between  2000  and  3500 
feet.     The  cocoa-nut  flourishes  best  at  sea-leveL     Bice  nins 
up  to  where  coffee  begins.     I  saw  one  plantation  of  tea  to- 
day looking  very  well  at  a  height  of  about  5000  feet;  only 
one  acre.      The  chinchona  is  also  doing  weU.     The  coffee 
crop  this  year  (1870)  is  about  800,000  cwt.     The  value  of 
cultivated   coffee-land  is  about   £5,000,000  sterling.    The 
cultivation  of  coffee  began  in  Ceylon  in  1837.      Avenge 
produce  of  an  acre    of  paddy-field,    20   bushels;    cocoa- 
nuts,  2000  to  4000  per  acre ;  coffee,  6  cwt.  per  acre ;  cinnir 
mon  gives  80  lbs.  an  acre.     The  cinnamon-gardens  in  die 
neighbourhood  of  Colombo  are  in  a  very  neglected  state, 
the   ground  very  foul.      The  revenue  of  Ceylon  is  about 
£1,000,000   sterling;    the  customs  yield  nearly  one-third; 
taxation  about  8s.  per  head.      Population,  2,500,000 ;  Euio- 
peans,  3000,  cne-half  military,  and  their  families  (plant- 
ers,  1000 ;    Civil  servants,  250 ;    merchants,  250).     Reli- 
gions— Buddhists  and  demon-worshippers,  1,350,000;  Gen- 
toos,  680,000 ;  Mohammedans,  134,000;  Christians,  180,000; 
of  these  the  Catholics  number  140,000 ;  Protestants,  40,000. 

Colombo  contains  91,000  inhabitants;  Jaffna,  20,000; 
Galle,  10,000 ;  Kandy,  10,000;  Trincomalee  and  Komegalk, 
3000  each.  Value  of  imports,  five  and  a  half  millions  8te^ 
ling.  Exports,  three  and  a  half  millions.  Area,  24,700 
square  miles,  or  fifteen  and  a  half  millions  acres. 

On  Sunday  before  breakfast  I  took  a  long  and  pleaaaat 
walk  around  Kandy  in  the  direction  of  Lady  Horton's  Walk, 
and  from  many  points  had  fine  views  of  the  neighbourhood. 
The  tropical  verdure  is  very  fine.  After  breakfast  I  went 
to  church,  which  was  attended  by  the  Governor  and  to 
wife,  some  seventy  civilians,  and  fifty  of  the  73d  Begiment; 
Mr  Glennie,  an  old  white-headed  man,  performed  the  service 
and  preached.  In  the  afternoon  I  visited  the  Botanicil 
Gardens  of  Peradenia,  under  charge  of  Mr  Thwaites.  Tb? 
are  of  considerable  extent,  and  have  good  walks  throagk 
them,  but  contain  little  else  than  native  forest-trees.    Froo 


COFFEE-STORES  IN  COLOMBO.  293 

tiie  jack-trees  I  gathered  some   shells  (the  Helix).      The 
ehindiona  and  tea  are  here  both  exotics,  of  course. 

23dl — Betumed  to  Colombo,  and  put  up  at  the  Galle  Face 
Hotel  (seventj-five  miles).  It  is  warm  at  Colombo,  the 
thermometer  standing  in  the  shade  between  80"^  and  90'', 
despite  the  south-west  monsoon  blowing  right  into  the  hotel, 
sitoated  as  it  is  close  down  on  the  beach. 

Visited  a  coflfee-store,  where  800  women  with  their  children 

are  employed  in  the  coffee  season  picking  out  the  faulty 

grains.    They  get  4^d.  a  bag  for  picking  it  over,  one  bag 

being  an  average  day's  work.     The  wages  of  an  ordinary 

labourer  on  a  coffee-plantation  is  9d.  a  day.     This  is  not  bad 

pay,  considering  the  labourer  may  live  on  6d.  a  week  (but 

Qinally  his  living  costs  him  2s.  a  week) ;  that  he  requires 

next  to  nothing  in  the    shape  of  clothing,  and  very  little 

boose  accommodation,  and  he  requires  no  fire  to  keep  him 

warm.    The  coolies  are  all  Tamils  from  the  opposite  coast 

of  India.     The  Cingalese  are  employed  as  indoor  servants, 

ind  in  the  cultivation  of  paddy,  and  in  trading  on  a  small 

Kale.    They  own  in  small  patches  a  good  deal  of  landed 

property.      There   is   a  well-to-do  air  about  the  men  and 

women  in  the  island,  and  no  beggars.     These  coffee-stores 

ire  owned  by  the  agents  of  the  coffee-planters. 

After  the  planter  has  picked  the  berry  and  cleaned  it  from 
tbe  outside  husk,  which  encloses  two  grains  of  coffee,  he 
exposes  it  to  the  sun  for  a  few  days,  partially  drying  it; 
ttd  then  he  despatches  it  from  his  estate  to  the  agents' 
stores  in  Colombo,  where  it  is  first  sorted  by  machinery  into 
three  sizes,  having  previously  been  thoroughly  dried  by 
exposure  to  the  sun  for  three  or  four  days,  and  then  picked 
ettefolly  over  by  women  and  children,  who  remove  all  the 
^Ity  berries.  I  should  have  mentioned,  however,  that  the 
'nt  operation  the  coffee  undergoes  after  drying  is  being 
■tripped  of  a  skin  which  envelops  it,  called  parchment 
^  is  done  by  machinery;  then  comes  the  sorting  of  it 
uito  three  sizes,  and  then  the  hand-picking.  After  this  it 
^  weighed,  put  into  casks  or  bags,  and  shipped.  The 
phnters  do  not  wait  to  pick  all  their  crop  before  sending  it 
te  the  agents'  stores  in  Colombo.  So  soon  as  they  have  got 
^  parcel  of  some  25  cwt  ready,  they  send  it  down.     As  a 


294  COFFEE'PLANTATIONS-CINNAMON'GARDEm. 

rule,  the  planter  takes  advances  from  the  agents  often  before, 
but  always  on,  the  coffee  being  shipped ;  indeed,  I  may  say, 
always  on  the  current  crop,  even  before  it  is  gathered.  The 
estates,  if  there  be  any,  that  are  entirely  free  from  mortgage 
are  very  few  indeed  in  the  whole  island.  The  interest  of 
money  is  10  per  cent — ^rather  a  heavy  tax  on  coffee-planten. 

The  crop  was  short  last  year,  and  present  appearances  are 
not  favourable  for  this  year.  Bone-dust  is  pretty  generaUj 
used  as  a  dressing  to  the  coffee-plant,  and  cow-dung  to  the 
extent  it  can  be  procured.  An  average  crop  is  6  cwt  to  the 
acre,  and  the  planter  considers  that  60s.  a  cwt.  obtained  in 
England  is  about  the  lowest  remunerating  price. 

2^tk — I  came  to  Galle  by  coach  from  Colombo,  distance 
seventy-three  miles.  The  road  runs  along  the  sea-shore  all 
the  way  over  a  complete  flat,  well  shaded.  I  may  say, 
indeed,  that  all  the  way  it  runs  through  a  forest  of  Iffead- 
fruit-trees,  mangoes,  jack-fruit,  the  cocoa-nut  palm,  the  king 
cocoa-nut  palm,  the  areca-nut  and  the  palmyra  palm,  the 
fan  palm,  a  few  coffee-plants  here  and  there,  plantains,  and 
an  infinity  of  other  trees  and  plants,  all  mixed  up  together. 
As  you  come  along  you  may  buy  a  green  cocoa-nut,  of  which 
the  milk  to  my  mind  forms  a  delicious  beverage,  for  Id., 
and  a  good  pine-apple  at  the  same  price.  The  only  passeDger 
in  the  coach  besides  myself  was  a  little  Cingalese,  a  clerk 
in  a  Government  office  at  Colombo,  who  had  got  a  days 
holiday  for  the  purpose  of  visiting  a  cinnamon-garden  he 
owned  situated  on  our  line  of  road.  It  consisted  of  120 
acres,  and  he  gave  for  it,  he  told  me,  £350  a  few  years  aga 
The  garden  had  already  paid  for  itself,  and  now  he  wis 
drawing  from  it  a  fair  income.  The  usual  yield,  he  said, 
was  1000  lbs.  cinnamon  per  annum,  worth  now  28.  per  Ik 
He  had  come  down  now  to  start  the  peeling,  quilling,  and 
baling  of  his  crop.  The  operation  of  cutting  the  branches 
was  performed  by  men,  the  peeling  and  quilling  waa  the 
work  of  women  and  children.  Wages  very  low — 6d.  to  7d. 
a  day  to  the  men,  and  4d.  to  the  women. 

It  would  seem  that  the  forming  of  coffee-plantations  htf 
progressed  so  rapidly  that  there  is  often  a  difficulty  expcr** 
enced  in  procuring  sufficient  labour  to  carry  forward  tiie  work; 
so  that  planters  are  now  obliged  to  keep  the  Tamils  on  ^ 


USAGE  OF  PRISONERS  AT  NE  WERA  ELLIA.    295 

work  for  the  whole  year,  instead  of  getting  rid  of  them  at 
the  end  of  the  picking  season,  as  they  used  to  do  formerly. 
There  is  a  good  deal  of  crimping  going  on — ^that  is,  drawing 
labourers  away  from  one  estate  by  offers  of  higher  wages  on 
to  another,  and  this  happens  when  labour  is  most  wanted,  in 
the  picking  season.  I  have  heard  planters  complain  of  the 
labourers  for  this ;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  the  blame  lies 
with  the  planter  who  strives  to  get  men  by  such  means. 
When  the  picking  season  is  approaching,  and  a  fair  guess 
can  be  made  as  to  the  value  of  the  probable  crop,  many  of  the 
planters  put  themselves  in  funds  to  carry  on  their  operations 
for  the  following  season  by  drawing  at  six  or  seven  months' 
date  on  their  agents  in  England,  and  get  their  bills  cashed 
by  the  agent  in  Colombo,  and  this,  as  it  may  be  conceived, 
is  often  done  at  a  ruinous  discount 

Notwithstanding  the  difficulty  experienced  at  times  by  the 
planters  to  find  all  the  labour  they  require,  wages  keep  very 
low.  Coolies  are  frequently  employed  to  carry  heavy  loads 
upon  their  heads  for  long  distances.  I  have  heard  of  one  who 
carried  a  heavy  load  for  his  master  in  an  incredibly  short 
time  a  distance  of  thirty-five  miles,  stimulated  to  do  it  by  an 
offer  of  sixpence  at  the  end  of  his  journey  I  Not  a  bad  story 
is  told  to  prove  how  well  criminals  are  treated  in  the  prisons 
of  Ceylon.  At  the  prison  at  Newera  Ellia,  a  hill  station, 
surrounded  by  jungle  almost  hundreds  of  miles  in  depth,  a 
crhninal  took  it  into  his  head  to  make  his  escape.  The  jailer, 
who  was  clearly  a  man  of  resources,  immediately  turned  out 
all  the  remaining  prisoners,  and  with  them  went  into  the 
jungle,  and  soon  hunted  down  and  captured  the  foolish  fellow 
who  had  run  away.  I  am  told  it  is  a  common  thing,  too, 
when  any  one  goes  to  the  prison  to  inquire  after  any  par- 
ticular criminal,  to  be  told  that  he  has  gone  down  to  the 
bazaar  to  purchase  some  necessaries.  On  one  occasion,  when 
the  visiting  officer  was  going  his  rounds,  inspecting  prisons 
in  Ceylon,  an  oldish  man  was  called  and  asked  if  he  had 
anything  to  complain  of?  He  said,  ^^No;  nothing.''  Was 
his  food  good  ?  "  Yes ;  very  good."  Was  he  hard  worked? 
"  No ;  not  at  all."  When  will  your  term  of  imprisonment  be 
np,  or  when  do  you  leave  the  prison  ?  ^^  Oh,  not  at  all,  I 
hope ;  I  am  very  comfortable  here  I " 


296         GALLE— CINGALESE  EXTORTIONISTS. 

June  U^. — There  is  nothing  much  in  the  waj  of  what  an 
called  Bights  at  Galle  to  help  the  waiting  traveller  to  paa 
the  time,  still  there  are  one  or  two  drives  that  may  be  ttto 
to  relieve  his  ennuu  I  confess  that  the  trafficking  going  oi 
in  front  of  the  Oriental  Hotel,  between  the  Cingalese  and  the 
steamboat  travellers,  afforded  me  constant  amusement  Ibeis 
Cingalese  are  represented  by  Bradshaw  to  be  great  exiw- 
tionists,  invariably  asking  for  their  wares  four  times  as  modi 
as  the  legitimate  price.  Bradshaw,  I  think,  had  better  rewrils 
the  article  on  the  Cingalese,  and  not  continue  to  mislead  hk 
countrymen ;  for  I  am  quite  sure,  in  the  majority  of  caaei, 
that  if  the  Cingalese  obtains  for  his  wares  one-fourth  thft 
price  he  asks  for  them,  as  a  rule  he  will  obtain  double  what 
he  ought  to  get  He  will  always  be  ready  in  the  end  to  tab 
an  eighth  of  what  he  asks,  and  sometimes  even  less.  In  mf 
presence  a  fellow  asked  twelve  rupees  for  a  ring,  and  ended 
by  offering  to  give  two  rings  for  one  and  a  half  rupees.  Li 
fact,  you  never  know  what  it  may  be  safe  to  offer.  If  a  fellof 
ask  you  ten  rupees  for  an  article,  and  you  buy  it  from  him 
for  two  rupees,  the  chances  are  you  will  have  paid  twice  si 
much  as  you  should  have  done.  You  fight  at  great  disad- 
vantage with  these  blackguards,  for  blackguards  4hey  cer- 
tainly are,  if  intense  lying  constitutes  blackguardism;  thej 
know  the  real  value  of  their  goods ;  you  rarely  ever  do  untfl 
you  have  made  a  purchase,  and  then  you  are  very  likely  to 
find  out  that  somebody  else  has  become  possessed  of  a  similar 
article  for  one-half  of  what  you  may  have  paid  for  it  These 
fellows,  who  to  a  young  hand  seem  little  more  than  a  parcel 
of  packmen,  have  their  agents  all  over  the  world,  with  whom 
they  are  in  constant  communication.  Highly  respectable 
jewellers  both  in  London  and  Paris,  and  in  almost  everf 
place  of  much  importance,  they  transact  business  with  to  a 
large  extent ;  in  fact,  many  of  them  are  very  rich,  and  well 
they  might  be,  for  once  a  fortnight  a  host  of  fresh  dq^ 
with  money  in  their  pockets,  come  into  their  clutches,  and 
are  invariably  handsomely  swindled.  For  an  article  the  pur- 
chase of  which  you  may  repent  of,  I  have  never  known  one 
of  those  fellows  offer  in  return  for  it  more  than  one-half  rf 
what  he  may  have  made  you  pay  for  it 

Zd. — In  walking  about  the  hotel  garden  in  early  momiof 


SAGACITY  OF  ELEPHANTS— GALLE  TO  SUEZ.  297 

with  a  couple  of  Mr  B.'s  children ,  we  came  upon  a  bird's 
nest  nicely  stowed  away  in  a  growing  bunch  of  bananas.  On 
examination  it  turned  out  to  be  full  of  young  ones,  and  I 
had  no  sooner  put  my  hand  upon  it  than  the  old  bird  made 
her  appearance^  and  took  up  a  position  close  to  the  nest, 
apparently  prepared  to  do  battle  in  defence  of  her  offspring. 
She  was  as  big  as  an  English  thrush,  and  somewhat  like  one. 
The  next  morning  I  went  again  to  see  the  nest,  and  as  I 
looked  for  it  in  the  head  of  bananas,  I  was  surprised  the  old 
bird  did  not  make  her  appearance.  Alas  I  the  nest  was  gone  I 
A  boy  in  the  hotel,  who  ought  to  have  known  better,  had 
taken  it  away,  in  spite  of  the  cries  of  the  mother,  who  had 
returned  more  than  once  to  the  spot,  and,  as  a  native  who 
was  at  work  in  the  garden  averred,  had  absolutely  shed  tears. 

Sir  E.  Tennant  tells  a  story  showing  the  wonderful  sagacity 
of  the  elephant.  Sir  E.  T.  was  riding  through  a  narrow  path 
in  the  jungle,  when  he  came  suddenly  upon  a  tame  elephant 
alone,  making  his  way  along  the  narrow  path  with  a  long 
piece  of  timber.  The  elephant  stopped  short  on  seeing  Sir 
K  T.,  dropped  the  piece  of  timber,  and  quietly  backed  off  the 
path  into  the  scrub,  clearly  for  the  purpose  of  allowing  him 
to  pass.  Sir  E.  T.'s  horse  hesitated  to  go  forward.  The 
elephant  observed  this,  and  backed  further  into  the  scrub, 
giving  at  the  same  time  a  grunt,  as  much  as  to  say,  ^^  You  fool  I 
why  do  you  not  come  along  ?  "  The  horse  still  hesitated,  so 
the  elephant  gave  an  impatient  grunt,  and  backed  still 
farther  into  the  bush.  The  horse  at  last  took  heart  of  grace, 
went  forward,  and  quietly  passed  the  elephant,  who  imme- 
diately resumed  the  labour  of  carrying  the  piece  of  timber 
ont  of  the  jungle.  Doubtless  this  story  must  be  true,  and  if 
80,  what  wonderful  sagacity  it  shows  the  elephant  to  possess, 
if  not  considerable  reasoning  powers  I 

5^^ — I  have  been  five  days  on  board  a  Peninsular  and 
Oriental  steamer  on  my  way  from  Galle  to  Suez.  We  are 
fighting  our  way  against  a  strong  south-west  monsoon,  and 
to  all  appearance  we  shall  make  a  long  passage  to  Aden. 
The  ship's  ports  are  closed,  and  the  thermometer  in  my  cabin 
88^  I  learn  that  the  mail-agents  on  board  these  boats  have 
been  done  away  with,  the  duty,  costing  some  £350  a  year, 
being  now  performed  by  the  third  officer,  in  addition  to  big 


298  ADEN— SOUTHERN  CROSS—SVEZ. 

other  worky  and  for  which  he  does  not  receive  one  stifor* 
The  captain  is  the  responsible  person,  bat  the  third  officer 
does  the  work. 

\Zthy  Aden. — We  arrived  here  this  morning.  The  build- 
ings at  Aden  are  increasing  in  nnmber,  and  denote  the 
stimulos  already  given  to  business  in  this  ^^  clinker ''  by  tlie 
opening  of  the  Suez  Canal.  It  seems  to  me  not  at  all  nnlikeiy 
that  Aden  is  destined  to  become  at  no  distant  date  a  port  cl 
deposit  for  the  productions  of  both  the  East  and  the  West^  for 
distribution  over  a  large  extent  of  the  neighbouring  coasti, 
and  probably  also  for  much  farther  afield. 

Ylth. — Yesterday  we  were  in  20°  north  latitade,  and  \uk 
night  the  constellation  of  the  Southern  Cross,  whose  gradual 
increasing  declination  I  had  been  watching  night  after  nigkt 
ever  since  our  departure  from  Galle,  disappeared  below  the 
horizon;  the  pointers,  keeping  watch  and  ward,  still  remainiii; 
above,  seemingly  to  point  out  the  spot  into  which  the  CSross, 
around  which  it  is  their  duty  to  make  one  revolution  in  eveij 
twenty-four  hours,  had  descended  out  of  sight  for  ever  for 
all  who  remain  north  of  us.  As  I  watched  and  took  my  last 
look  at  the  descending  Cross,  I  wondered  what  pointen 
directed  the  Empress  Helena  when  she  sought  for  and  found 
at  the  foot  of  Calvary  the  remains  of  the  true  Cross,  .or 
rather  the  three  crosses,  for  she  found  them  all  there  intacti 

Vdth. — We  have  had  delightful  weather  for  the  last  two 
days,  with  the  thermometer  at  80"*.  One  of  the  pointers  of 
the  Southern  Cross  (in  26®  N.  lat)  passed  out  of  sight  be 
low  the  horizon  last  night.  The  Great  Bear  shines  glorioosly 
now  well  above  our  heads ;  doubtless  it  is  the  finest  constel* 
lation  in  the  heavens,  whatever  may  be  said  of  the  thicklj- 
starred  Milky  Way  in  the  proximity  of  the  Southern  Cross. 
As  for  the  Cross  itself,  so  lost  is  it  among  other  stars,  there 
would  be  difficulty  in  finding  it  were  it  not  for  the  two  bright 
pointers  that  are  employed  in  travelling  around  it. 

20/A,  Suez. — We  at  once  hauled  alongside  the  quay  on 
the  basin  outside  the  French  dry  dock.  The  cool  weather 
we  met  with  on  entering  the  Red  Sea  remained  with  us  to 
the  last ;  indeed,  as  we  neared  Suez  it  was  less  warm,  sod 
the  thermometer  fell  to  80°..  The  sky  during  the  whole 
time  in  the  Bed  Sea  had  been  free  from  clouds,  and  the  nights 


RECLAIMING  THE  DESERT.  «99 

glorious  twilight.  Altogether  we  have  seen  about  a  dozen 
Bteamers  between  Aden  and  Suez,  and  there  are  some  twenty 
in  this  port  The  railway  comes  down  to  where  the  steamer 
lies  alongside  the  quay,  and  when  we  arrived  we  fonnd  a 
goods  train  waiting  to  take  cargo  and  luggage  to  Alexandria. 
The  passengers  breakfasted  at  seven,  and  at  eight  they  also 
started  for  Alexandria.  I  was  the  only  passenger  for  Suez, 
and  with  my  Inggage  in  charge  of  a  conple  of  donkey-boys, 
1  trudged  off  to  this  hotel,  distant  from  the  quay  between 
three  and  four  miles.  The  town  is  now  at  a  very  inconvenient 
distance  from  the  dock,  but  this  will  be  remedied  by-and- 
bj,  for  the  mud  which  is  being  dredged*  up  about  the  dock 
and  at  the  entrance  of  the  canal  is  emptied  into  shallow 
water,  and  will  become  a  site  for  building  before  long.  In 
the  dry  dock  there  was  a  large  London  steamer,  that  got 
aground  just  as  she  was  emerging  from  the  canal,  and  iigured 
her  screw.  She  blocked  the  way  for  twenty-four  hours,  much 
to  the  disgust  of  a  Messagerie  mail-boat  from  China,  that 
siiffered  delay  in  consequence. 

I  have  just  been  out  in  the  desert  to  look  at  a  piece  of 
land,  a  hundred  acres  perhaps,  a  French  company  is  reclaim- 
ing by  means  of  irrigation  from  the  fresh-water  canal. 
There  are  already  fruit  and  other  trees  planted  around  it,  and 
they  are  growing  vigorously,  as  is  also  some  maize  and 
8ome  very  good  lettuce.  It  is  only  a  few  months  since  the 
water  was  first  let  in  upon  the  land ;  it  really  looks  as  if 
the  Nile  must  have  covered,  some  day  or  other,  all  this  por- 
tion of  the  desert,  and  left  behind  it  a  bed  of  soil  which, 
mixed  as  it  is  with  the  sand,  causes  the  mass  to  become  pro- 
dactive  so  soon  as  water  is  let  in  upon  it. 

Of  passengers  we  had  a  motley  group  on  board  the 
steamer — sixty-five  adult  first-class  passengers,  besides  a 
dozen  children,  several  servants,  and  a  dozen  second-class 
passengers.  We  had  many  nations — English,  Irish,  and 
Scotch,  Germans,  Danes,  and  Dutch,  Japanese  and 
Chinese.  All  but  the  last  were  first-class.  Among  some 
ten  Dutch  from  Java  we  had  one  lady,  whom  we  used  to  call 
our  ^^  piice  de  riMtancCy^  who  could  not  have  weighed  less 
than  seventeen  to  eighteen  stone,  whilst  her  husband  was  as 
thin  as  a  lath ;  and  among  the  English  passengers  we  had 


30O  PASSENGERS  PER  P.  AND  O.  BOAT. 

one  man  who  weighed  as  much  as  the  Dntch  lady^  iriufat 
his  wife  was  about  as  spidery  a  looking  person  as  I  had  enr 
seen. 

Then  we  had  henpecked  husbands^  who  seemed,  neyerihe- 
less,  to  doat  upon  their  wives,  and  some  wives  who  doatei 
upon  anybody  but  their  husbands.  We  had  two  ladies  who 
had  left  their  husbands  behind  them,  and  others  who  wooll 
have  liked  very  much  to  have  had  husbands  with  them,  uA 
one  we  had  who  had  lost  one  husband,  and  was  quite  readf 
for  another. 

The  ladies  were  divided  into  three  sets — the  Calcutta,  tlie 
Madras,  and  the  China  ladies ;  and,  like  fluids  of  diflbiait 
weights,  they  obstinately  refused  to  mix  together.  Indeed, 
the  Calcutta  Civil  servants  hardly  deigned  to  notice  the  other 
passengers,  evidently  considering  themselves  better  than  tbe 
mass  into  which  they  had  been  thrown  ;  and  well  theymigbti 
for  they  had  the  best  cabins  in  the  ship,  and  sitting  at  tin 
captain's  end  of  the  table,  they  generally  had  the  first  poO 
at  anything  there  might  be  particularly  nice.  We  had  gep- 
erals,  colonels,  captains,  and  lieutenants  on  board,  and  Hbej 
kept  pretty  much  apart  too.  We  had  one  general,  the  smallert 
general  (unless  it  be  Tom  Thumb)  I  had  ever  seen.  He  migkt 
have  been  half  an  inch  over  five  feet,  but  to  that  I  would  not 
even  swear.  We  had  coffee-planters  from  India  and  fiom 
Ceylon.  We  had  commercial  travelling  merchants,  merchant!' 
clerks,  and  telegraph-clerks,  doctors,  and  one  Calcutta  pilot 
We  had  also  one  naval  man  going  home  on  promotion,  and  M 
small  judge  from  Madras  retiring  on  £400  a  year. 

2'Zd. — I  remained  at  Suez  until  to-day,  when  I  embaiM 
on  board  a  steamer  going  through  the  canal.  We  wa« 
detained  a  day  nearly  by  the  big  steamer  Indus^  aground 
at  the  entrance  of  the  canal,  completely  barring  the  wtf. 
There  is  a  rise  and  fall  of  tide  here  of  about  seven  feet,  and 
this  is  felt  in  the  canal,  almost  imperceptibly,  up  as  far  ai 
the  Lacs  Amers,  a  distance  from  this  end  of  the  canal  of 
some  forty-five  miles.  The  Indus  is  the  last  new  steamer 
of  the  P.  and  0.  Company,  and  draws  twenty-two  fee* 
water.  She  has  been  three  days  in  getting  through  tin 
canal  (ninety  miles),  having  grounded  several  times.  1)^ 
moment  the  Indus  vacated  the  canal  we  went  in,  and  ii 


SUEZ  CANAL.  301 

twenty-fiye  hours  reached  Port  Said,  withont  once  having 
groanded,  and  we  were  drawing  seventeen  feet  water.  Pilots 
are  not  permitted  to  continue  on  after  sunset.  We  brought 
up  in  the  canal  a  few  hundred  yards  on  the  Port  Said  side 
of  the  Lacs  Amers  (now  called  the  Grand  Basin),  in  fact,  at 
Serapium,  and  there  we  remained  tied  to  two  stakes  in  the 
bank  until  four  next  morning,  when  we  again  got  under 
way,  and  reached  Port  Said  at  5  p^m.  We  met  three 
vessels  in  the  course  of  our  transit  outward  bound,  coming 
through  from  Port  Said.  The  first  was  the  XJna^  a  deeply- 
laden  English  steamer ;  we  drew  up  alongside  the  bank  to 
allow  her  to  pass.  The  next  was  the  gunl^oat  Curlew;  we 
drew  up  also  to  allow  her  to  pass.  The  third  craft  was  made 
to  draw  up  for  us.  She  was  an  Italian  bark  in  charge  of  a 
tag-steamer.  This  operation  of  drawing  up  alongside  the 
hank  of  the  canal  to  allow  other  vessels  to  pass  is  done  in 
accordance  with  signals  made  at  the  nearest  station  you  may 
happen  to  be  approaching.  There  must  be  a  dozen  or  more 
of  these  stations  on  th^  canal.  The  least  breadth  of  the 
canalised  part  of  the  canal  is  fifty-eight  metres  at  the  sur- 
face of  the  water,  and  the  greatest  breadth  is  133  metres. 
The  bottom  is  everywhere,  I  believe,  twenty-two  metres  wide. 
The  channel  through  Lake  Timsah,  at  Ismalia,  is  buoyed 
and  staked. 

Through  the  Menzaleh  lakes  the  channel  is  formed  by 
hanking  up  the  dredged  mud  on  both  sides.  By-the-by,  the 
channel  through  Lake  Menzaleh  was  dredged  in  shallow 
water,  leaving  a  large  expanse  of  water  on  the  upper  or  land 
side,  covering  some  thousands  of  acres.  The  banks  of  the 
canal  cut  off  the  supply  of  water  from  the  sea  or  eastern 
side,  and  the  consequence  has  been  that  the  large  expanse  of 
water  on  the  land-side,  upon  which  thousands  of  flamin- 
goes and  other  birds  were  constantly  disporting,  has  entirely 
dried  up,  and  the  recovered  land  might,  I  should  say,  be 
some  day  turned  to  good  account  Part  of  the  Lacs  Amers 
is  also  buoyed  and  staked ;  but  in  the  Grand  Basin  part, 
from  lighthouse  to  lighthouse,  about  ten  miles,  there  are 
neither  stakes  nor  buoys.  This  part  of  the  lake  did  not  re- 
quire dredging  at  all ;  in  fact,  there  was  no  part  of  the  Lacs 
Amers  that  did  require  dredging,  but  the  water  that  once 


302        SUEZ  CANAL^RETRIBUTIVE  JUSTICE. 

filled  it  has  entirely  dried  up  :  it  took  four  months  to  fill  by 
a  doable  stream  flowing  into  it  at  the  same  time  from  tett 
seas.  Beyond  the  Lacs  Amers,  all  through  the  canalised  pii^ 
we  had  a  surface  current  of  from  a  half  knot  to  a  knot  agaiail 
us,  caused  by  a  fresh  breeze  of  northerly  wind^  which  prenfli 
here  (the  pilot  told  me)  for  four  months  of  the  year.  Dciii 
the  rest  of  the  year  the  surface  current  for  four  months  mu 
from  the  south  ;  and  for  the  remaining  four  months^  diiij]i( 
which  there  is  little  or  no  wind  felt  in  the  desert,  the  iv 
face  of  the  canal  is  tranquil. 

Retributive  justice  I  Is  there  any  man  in  the  world  «1m 
has  not  suffered  from  the  thoughtlessness  of  others?  Ii 
there  any  man  in  the  world  who  has  not  caused  suffering  ti 
others  by  his  own  thoughtlessness  ?  I  acknowledge  mjidl 
a  great  culprit  in  this  respect,  and  whenever  I  am  made  ti 
suffer  myself  now  by  the  thoughtlessness  of  others,  I  eon 
sider  that  it  is  only  retributive  justice  which  is  following  mi 
up.  On  Sunday  the  25th  June  we  arrived  at  Port  Siu 
from  Suez,  and  in  consequence  of  having  on  board  two  pis- 
sengers  (taken  in  at  Suez)  not  upon  the  ship's  roll,  we  wen 
put  in  quarantine.  On  Monday  morning  a  Russian  steiM 
arrived  from  Alexandria,  bound  to  Jaffa,  my  destination  oi 
my  way  to  Jerusalem.  It  was  just  thethingthat  suited  me.  Wi( 
were  still,  however, in  quarantine  when  she  arrived, but  expect- 
ing every  moment  to  get  pratique,  when  a  clerk  from  the  hoiw 
of  the  consignee  came  alongside.  I  asked  him  at  what  o'dod 
the  Russian  steamer  would  leave  for  Jaffa.  He  replied  ib 
was  posted  to  sail  at  four  o'clock  (I  afterwards  found  tU 
she  had  been  posted  to  sail  at  11  A.M.)  It  was  getting  d 
towards  noon,  and  the  health-officer  had  not  made  la 
appearance ;  so,  with  the  captain  and  one  of  the  health- 
officer's  men,  who  had  been  put  on  board  to  prevent  outsiA 
communication  with  the  vessel,  we  started  in  the  gig  for  tb 
quarantine  station  on  shore,  to  learn  when  we  were  to  hiw 
pratique.  We  should  have  gone  sooner,  but  believing  tlH 
Russian  steamer  would  not  leave  for  Jaffa  before  4  p.]f.j  ^ 
considered  we  were  still  in  good  time.  On  our  way  to  tk 
shore  we  met  the  health-officer  coming  off  to  give  * 
pratique.  In  five  minutes  afterwards  we  were  free,  fsA  J 
had  gone  to  my  cabin  to  bring  out  my  traps  to  proceed  <^ 


SUEZ  CANAL.  303 

board  the  Bassian,  when  the  captain  sang  oat,  ^^  The  Russian 
steamer  is  off !  "  I  rnshed  on  deck,  and  sore  enongh,  there  she 
was  steaming  away  at  the  top  of  her  speed.  And  how  did 
this  happen  ?  The  scatter-brain  clerk,  who  told  me  the  time 
fixed  for  her  to  leave  was  at  4  p.m.,  had  never  taken  the 
trouble  to  satisfy  himself  on  the  sabject,  and  thus  thought- 
lessly has  condemned  me  to  remain  here  until  .  another 
steamer  arrives  for  Jaffa,  causing  me  to  lose  four  days,  or 
perhaps  more,  of  the  short  span  of  life  still  left  to  me,  and 
patting  me  to  the  expense  of  from  £5  to  £10  into  the 
bargain ! 

Well,  and  what  is  to  be  done  ?  Grin  and  bear  it,  and  con- 
sider the  event  as  one  by  which  I  am  made  to  pay  a  small 
instalment  of  retributive  justice. 

28^^ — There  is  but  little  work  going  on  upon  the  canal  just 
now:  even  the  dredging  necessary  in  parts  to  keep  the 
whole  line  navigable  is  all  but  at  a  standstill.  In  the  com- 
pany's workshops,  in  which  skilled  workmen  used  to  be 
counted  by  hundreds,  the  number  is  now  reduced  to  twenty  or 
less.  The  jetty  or  pier,  which  will  require  some  thousands  of 
tons  of  either  natural  or  artificial  stone  still  to  complete  it,  re- 
mains in  an  unfinished  state.  There  is  no  dredging  going  on 
even  in  the  outer  harbour,  which  is  useless  so  long  as  it  is  not 
deepened.  The  manufacture  of  stone  is  not  being  proceeded 
with.  In  fact,  retrenchment  seems  to  be  now  in  every 
department  the  order  of  the  day;  and  even  so,  I  under- 
stand, there  are  no  surplus  funds  out  of  which  to  pay  any 
satis&ctory  dividend  to  the  shareholders,  who  in  a  man- 
ner now  are  consequently  worse  off  than  when  the  money  was 
being  raised  to  make  the  canal,  for  then  they  did  get  divi- 
dends, and  heavy  dividends  or  interest,  out  of  the  capital, 
but  now  there  is  no  source  from  which  to  draw  dividends, 
and  the  original  shareholders  get  nothing.  True,  the  canal 
has  been  opened,  and  many  vessels  are  passing  through  it, 
but  the  larger  vessels  suffer  considerable  delay.  The  Indus 
(P.  and  0.)  was  three  days  in  getting  through,  and  one  of 
the  Messagerie  boats  is  hard  and  fast  aground  in  Timsah, 
and  can  only  get  off  after  discharging  a  considerable  portion 
of  her  coals.  The  fact  is,  the  canal  is  not  wide  enough ; 
twenty-two  metres  in  the  bottom  is  in  practice  found  to  be 


304         SUEZ  CANAL— REQUIRES  WIDENING. 

too  narrow  even  now^  with  a  limited  number  oiT  vessdi 
passing  through.  Then  how  totally  inadequate  that  widtli 
would  be  found  in  a  few  years  hence,  when,  probably,  the 
number  of  vessels  will  be  quintuple  what  it  is  at  present! 
Even  now  a  good  deal  of  delay  is  experienced  by  the  smalkr 
vessels  being  obliged  to  draw  up  to  allow  other  vessels  to  pin 
them,  for,  I  believe,  in  no  part  of  the  transit,  unless  it  beui 
the  lakes,  when  two  vessels  come  from  opposite  directions, 
is  one  allowed  to  pass  without  the  other  being  drawn  up  u 
close  to  the  bank  as  the  depth  of  water  will  permit  Thoe 
are  no  sidings  of  auy  consequence  in  any  part  of  the  canaL 
The  canal,  then,  must  be  widened,  and  whence  is  the  monef 
to  come  to  do  it  with  ?  Why,  John  Bull  will  have  to  do  i^ 
for  two  very  obvious  reasons  :  first,  because  he  is,  probsUji 
the  only  party  who  can  conveniently  find  the  money  jut 
now  ;  and  next,  because  he  is  more  interested  in  having  it 
done  than  any  other  body,  since  four-sixths  of  the  tonnage, 
or  thereabouts,  that  has  hitherto  passed  through,  and  that 
will  doubtless  pass  through  for  the  future,  has  been,  and  will 
be,  English. 

In  1870,  491  vessels,  of  an  aggregate  tonnage  of  443^12 
tons,  of  which  314  vessels,  measuring  291,680  tons,  ivere 
English,  passed  through  the  canal.  The  amount  reoeifed 
for  tonnage  dues  was — 

Tonnage  dues,           ....  4,370,616^ 

Passengers,               ....  75,244.01 

Towing,         .....  266,920.00 

PUotage, 357,3iai6 

6,069,09a50 

On  30th  I  embarked  in  an  Egyptian  steamer  for  Jaffa, 
which  took  us  down  in  seventeen  hours.  The  only  passen- 
gers were  three  Americans  and  myself;  one  was  a  dealer  in 
flax,  and  of  the  other  two,  one  was  a  whip  and  glove  maker, 
and  the  other  a  druggist  I  mention  this  to  show  you  how 
much  more  all  classes  of  Americans  travel  than  we  Englisk 
do.  These  gentlemen  travelled  with  a  very  small  amonnt  rf 
luggage,  and  all  I  had  was  contained  in  a  black  leather  bag; 
60  tiiat  when  the  couple  of  dozen  boats  arrived  alongside  the 
steamer  from  the  shore  to  take  the  passengers  and  their 


Jaffa  to  Jerusalem.  305 

luggage^  there  was  a  tremendous  row  amoDg  the  boatmen  as 
to  who  should  carry  ns  and  our  small  modicum  of  luggage 
on  shore,  and  it  was  only  after  our  luggage  had  been  bandied 
aboQt  from  boat  to  boat  for  a  good  half  hour  that  the  battle 
was  finally  decided,  and  we  found  ourselves  settled  down  in 
two  boats.  Really  at  one  time  the  affair  looked  so  serious 
that  a  man  unaccustomed  to  Jaffa  would  have  thought  it 
most  end  in  a  death-struggle.  Nothing  of  the  sort ;  the  fight 
was  bloodless,  and  the  moment  it  was  decided,  the  victors 
and  the  vanquished  were  again  on  the  best  of  terms.  We, 
too,  had  our  fight  against  extortion,  and  ultimately  got  off 
by  paying  a  franc  each.  The  examination  at  the  custom- 
house being  over,  we  marched  off  to  the  new  hotel,  kept  by  a 
German  in  the  American  settlement,  half  a  mile  outside  the 
town  of  Jaffa. 

July  2d. — There  was  a  good  deal  of  discussion  among  my 
American  friends  before  they  could  arrange  with  a  dragoman 
for  horses  to  carry  them  to  the  Holy  City ;  but  finally  a  dra- 
goman agreed  to  find  them  horses,  and  pay  their  hotel  bil^ 
from  Jaffa  to  Jerusalem,  and  so  long  as  they  remained  in 
Jerusalem,  acting  as  their  guide  at  the  same  time,  for  20s. 
each  per  day.  This  knotty  affair  settled,  and  after  a  fair 
lancheon,  we  started  for  Bamleh^  and  at  a  snail's  pace 
we  reached  the  convent  in  three  hours.  The  distance 
cannot  be  over,  if  it  is  so  much,  as  twelve  miles.  The 
monks,  of  whom  there  are  seventeen  in  the  convent,  Italians 
and  Spaniards,  treated  us  very  fairly ;  gave  us  not  a  bad 
snpper,  and  clean  comfortable  beds.  At  2.30  the  next 
morning  we  were  in  the  saddle  again,  and  at  noon  arrived 
at  Homstein  8  new  hotel  in  the  Eternal  City. 

Many  handsome  houses  have  been  built  outside  the  walls 
of  Jerusalem,  on  the  Jaffa  road,  since  I  last  saw  the  city 
two  years  before,  and  many  more  are  in  course  of  construc- 
tion. It  really  looks  as  if  a  second  Jerusalem  will  grow  up 
before  long  outside  the  walls.  Land,  I  find,  has  increased 
in  value.  A  building  lot  offered  to  me  when  I  was  last 
there  for  £300  has  been  sold  since  for  £500.  The  Bussian 
Government  were  the  first  to  build  outside  the  walls,  and 
the  example  they  set  is  now  being  briskly  followed.  Two  of 
my  American  fellow-travellers  are  hoTB  de  combat^  or  fancy 

u 


3o6  SCHOOLS  AT  JAFFA. 

they  are.  They  have  had  a  doctor,  who  has  been  prescribing 
pills  and  draughts.  What  can  the  poor  man  do  otheniie 
than  physic  people  who  send  for  him  ? 

At  Jaffa  I  visited  Mr  Hay,  the  American  Consnl,  and  it 
his  house  I  saw  an  American  lady,  his  aunt,  Miss  Baldwio, 
who  told  me  she  had  been  thirty  years  employed  in  a  mii- 
sionary  school  at  Athens ;  she  had  been  a  year  only  at  Jail, 
and  had  already  got  together  a  very  respectable  schodd 
sixty  boys,  half  Mahometan  children  and  half  ChristiaBi 
whom  she  accommodates  in  the  lower  part  of  the  Gonsiiri 
house.  I  visited  the  school  with  her,  and  fonud  the  Axil 
boys  well  advanced  in  speaking  English,  and  also  in  writi]i( 
it.  The  school  is  conducted  by  two  Arab  teachers.  IGi 
Baldwin  told  me  the  attendance  was  regular,  notwithstul 
ing  that  many  of  the  children  have  a  mile  to  walk  to  th 
school,  and  that  the  parents  of  the  Mahometan  children  madi 
not  the  slightest  objection  to  their  children  mixing  with  th 
Christian  children  and  really  receiving  a  Christian  edufii 
tion,  the  Bible  of  course  being  a  class-book  in  the  school 
Nevertheless  Miss  Baldwin  is  very  careful  not  to  shock  th 
prejudices  of  the  Mahometan  parents  by  thrusting  Ghrifltiai 
dogmas  on  their  children,  but  trusts  more  for  good  restdti 
to  a  system  of  moral  culture  and  training.  This,  I  am  con* 
vinced,  is  the  true  way  of  spending  missionary  money  fiffi 
chance  of  any  return  from  it.  I  also  visited  a  small  giib 
school  at  the  settlement.  The  children  were  of  Grermii 
American,  Polish,  and  Mahometan  parents.  They  w«« 
employed,  when  I  went  into  the  school,  in  writing  Englid 
from  dictation,  and  I  could  not  but  wonder  at  the  correctnett 
of  their  spelling — the  American  child  being  the  only  one  wh 
made  many  blunders. 

6M. —  Since  my  arrival  in  Jerusalem  the  weather  has  been 
delightful,  the  thermometer  ranging  from  72**  to  79*  in  oj 
room.  Many  people,  old  residents,  to  whom  I  have  spito" 
on  the  subject,  are  decidedly  of  opinion  that  the  most  de8i^ 
able  season  for  visiting  the  Holy  City  is  between  the  IStb 
June  and  the  15  th  September;  the  weather,  they  say,  during  ill 
that  time,  though  the  thermometer  may  sometimes  touch  Vf) 
is  fine  and  moderately  cool,  free  from  the  hot  winds  whick 
blow  occasionally  before  and  after  those  dates.     No  donbt,  in 


THRESHING  ON  THE  PLAINS  OF  SHARON    307 

the  winter  months  storms  of  wind  and  rain  are  not  infrequent, 
and  interfere  greatly  with  the  comfort  of  travellers ;  from 
these,  of  coarse,  you  are  entirely  free  between  the  15th 
Jane  and  the  15th  September  or  thereabonts. 

8^^ — ^After  paying  my  last  visit  on  Mount  Zion  in  com- ' 
pany  with  an  Arab  servant  boy  mounted  on  a  male  with  my 
Inggage,  I  started  from  Jerusalem  for  Jaffa,  and  without 
drawing  rein  en  rtmte^  we  arrived  at  the  convent  at  BAmleh 
in  about  seven  hours.  My  horse  was  a  slow  pacer,  and  the 
luggage-mule  had  a  chronic  lameness,  still  we  got  over  the 
ground' at  a  very  fair  rate,  for  with  luggage  the  journey  from 
Jerusalem  to  Bamleh,  although  only  twenty-six  miles, 'is 
seldom  made  in  less  than  nine  hours.  We  had  fine  moon- 
light, and  after  getting  away  a  few  miles  from  the  Zion  or 
Jaffii  gate,  by  which  travellers  usually  leave  the  city  when 
bound  to  Ji^a,  the  whole  way  to  Bamleh  the  road  was 
thronged  with  laden  donkeys  and  camels,  the  former  carrying 
vegetables,  and  the  latter  imported  articles,  principally 
boards,  from  Jaffa  to  the  Holy  City.  Reaping  on  the  plains 
of  Sharon  is  over,  and  threshing  now  is  in  full  operation. 
In  one  spot  I  saw  sixty  pair  oxen  at  work^  each  team  of  four 
or  six  oxen  treading  out  a  separate  lot  of  wheat,  about  as 
much  as  would  cover  a  circle  of  ten  to  twenty  yards  in 
diameter.  The  scriptural  command,  ^^  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle 
the  ox  that  treadeth  out  the  corn,*'  is  strictly  followed  by 
Mahometan,  Christian,  and  Jew. .  In  the  immediate  neigh- 
bourhood of  Jerusalem  it  is  difficult  to  find  a  spot  level 
enongh  for  any  operation  that  requires  a  few  square  yards  of 
a  flat,  and  so  it  is  that  the  upper  pool  of  Guyon,  when  dry,  * 
is  made  use  of  by  the  Turks  for  drilling  their  troops,  and  the 
lower  pool  of  Guyon  by  the  farmers  for  threshing  out  their 
com.  Near  Jaffa,  on  the  plain,  some  Polish  Jews  are 
employed  in  the  cultivation  of  a  few  hundred  acres  of  land, 
given  to  them  by  the  Sultan  free  of  taxes  for  a  term  of  ten 
years.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  see  some  of  these  gentry  use- 
fully employed,  for  I  am  told  that  out  of  five  or  six  thousand 
of  them  inhabiting  Jerusalem,  there  are  not  above  a  couple 
of  hundred  who  do  not  participate  in  the  ten  or  twelve 
thousand  pounds  of  alms  (for  the  amount  is  reduced  to  that 
Bum  now)  which  is  gathered  annually  for  them  throughout 


3o8  POPULA  TION  OF  JER  USALEM. 

the  world.  The  whole  sum  collected  may  be  four  or  five 
times  that  amonnt,  but  jtlst  what  happens  in  England  in 
collections  for  Christianising  the  Jews^  and  other  coUectioiu 
also,  the  lion's  share  falls  into  any  hands  but  those  of  the  parties 
for  whom  the  money  is  collected,  that  is,  it  is  absorbed  bj 
the  cost  of  collecting  and  other  contingent  expenses.  About 
five  or  six  pounds  to  each  of  the  Polish  and  (German  Jem 
(the  Spanish  Jews  do  not  participate  in  this  charity),  I  am 
told,  may  be  the  average  payment,  but  there  are  some  among 
the  Jews  who  are  called  privileged,  who  receive  perhqii 
some  forty  or  fifty  pounds  of  this  annual  collection,  whilst, 
on  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  perhaps  among  the  most 
indigent  who  do  not  get  more  than  40s.  a  year.  Besides 
this  amount,  collected  by  paid  collectors  throughout  the 
world,  there  is  a  further  sum  of  four  or  five  hundred  pounds 
a  year,  which  comes  principally  from  the  society  in  England 
to  Bishop  Qobat,  to  be  distributed  among  the  most  miserable 
of  these  Jews ;  and  perhaps  I  may  not  be  wrong  in  conjectJff- 
ing  that  any  proselytes  that  are  made  to  Christianity  oome 
from  this  class,  though  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  for  the 
last  ten  years  there  have  not  been  ten  converts  to  Ghristi- 
anity  made  among  the  Jews  in  Jerusalem.  From  the  most 
reliable  information  I  have  been  able  to  obtain,  I  should  saj 
the  population  of  Jerusalem  must  be  between  16,000  and 
20,000.  There  may  be  now  in  the  Holy  City  11,000  Jews, 
4000  Mahometans,  and  perhaps  3000  Christians  all  told,  but 
this  must  be  considered  as  only  an  approximate  statement, 
since  no  census  of  the  population  has  ever  been  taken  by  the 
Turkish  authorities,  and  probably  never  will  be.  A  friend 
of  mine,  who  was  intimato  with  one  of  the  Pashas  ol 
Jerusalem,  took  an  opportunity  of  hinting  to  him  the  ad- 
visability of  keeping  some  accounts  of  the  deaths  that  took 
place  in  the  city.  The  Pasha  quietly  replied,  that  he  bad 
more  than  enough  of  trouble  in  looking  after  the  living;  the 
dead  could  take  care  of  themselves. 

18^A. — From  Jafia  I  pushed  on  to  Port  Said  and  Alex- 
andria, and  thence  on  to  Marseilles  and  home. 


THIRD   TOUR. 

PAIESTINE— ALEPPO— ACROSS  SYEIA  TO  DIARBEKIR 
—  DOWN  THE  TIGRIS  — BABYLON  — BAGDAD  TO 
KURRACHEE— UP  THE  INDUS  TO  LAHORE— CASH- 
MERE —  INDIA  —  CEYLON  —  CHINA — JAPAN  —  AUS- 
TRALIA—TASMANIA. 


I 


*, 


i 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

UoDt  Cenifl  tannel^  Aurora— Jenualem—  Canon  Tristram  kidnapped,  ranaom  sent— 
Asphalt  exported — Bayle7*s  school— Bishop  Gobat's  sohoof— Herod  ga^e  Cleo- 
pa^  land— <}oblan's  encampment— Farmer  Bedouins— Inscription — Dolmens- 
Hot  springs  of  Callirhoe — Dead  Sea — Mixed  breed  of  Negroes  and  Arabs- 
Tell  Bhama,  ruins — Bedouin  tents— Captain  Warren's  excavations — Jericho 
mounds,  debris  of  brick-kilns — Jerusalem — English  cemetery,  its  difficulties — 
— Min  Dickson's  school— Boy  drowned  himseU*  man  shot  himself— Ja£fa— Ger- 
man colony,  Sect  of  the  Temple — Destruction  of  English  oemetery — Tripoli, 
Isrgeorsnge-groTes— Lattakia — Aboorico  tobacco — ^Sun  and  moon  worBhippers  in 
the  mountains — American  missionaries  there— Iskanderun — Beilan,  native  Pro- 
testants— Aleppo— Turks  never  repair — Start  for  Diarbekir— Conical  dwdlings— 
The  Turks  only  count  men  as  population— The  country  might  be  a  paradise — 
Abrsham  bom  at  Orfa — H0I7  fish— Taurus  covered  with  snow — Mound  not  yet 
excavated— Murillo  beauties— I%e  Aleppo  btttton.  a  large  scabby  sore- Daily 
roatine,  food  cheap — ^Turldshkhan— Tempest— With  the  Knurds — Nothing  to  eat, 
eoaxed  the  women  and  got  plenty — ^Diarbekir  on  the  Tigris,  once  a  formidable 
plaee— Boys*  achool — No  money-changer,  no  bank,  no  newspaper,  filthy  gullies 
m  streets — ^Bussian  Consul— People  slaves,  ofilcials  rogues,  electric  telegraph 
little  used — Prepare  to  descend  the  Tigris  on  a  skin  X^/ii;— Yankee  muskets— 
Russian  Consul  offends  Turks  by  entering  the  mosque  with  boots  on — Aleppo 
IvtUm,  how  caused. 

Left  London  on  2l8t  January  1872  for  Paris.  The  25th 
arrived  at  Turin  via  the  Mont  Cenis  tunnel.  This  wonder- 
ful work  is  7J  miles  long,  33  feet  wide,  with  a  double  line 
of  rails  throughout,  and  19}  feet  high.  It  is  ventilated  by 
compressed  air.  The  line  of  rail  is  4179  feet  above  the 
Mediterranean,  and  3480  feet  below  the  summit  of  the 
mountain.  The  work  cost  six  millions  sterling.  At  Florence 
on  28th,  and  at  Bome  on  2d  February.  Then  on  to  Naples, 
which  we  left  again  on  4th,  and  twelve  hours  by  rail  took  us 
to  Brindisi.  During  the  night  we  were  treated  to  a  grand 
display  of  aurora  borealis ;  it  lasted  from  6  p.m.  to  midnight, 
and  frequently  extended  over  three-quarters  of  the  viaible 
horizon,  and  thence  up  into  the  heavens.  The  changes  were 
inoesBant,  and  more  than  once  nearly  the  whole  sky  was 
blood-red,  the  stars  shining  brightly  at  the  same  time. 
Humboldt  says  this  is  a  very  rare  occurrence  in  Italy. 

Embarked  at  Brindisi  on  board  the  Malta^  and  in  seventy- 
two  hours  found  ourselves  at  Alexandria.  The  10th,  em- 
barked on  board  the  Amerique^  calling   at  Port  Said,  and 


3 1 2     CANON  TRISTRAM  KIDNAPPED— ASPHALT, 

reached  Jaffa  early  on  morning  of  12th.  Pushed  on  to  the 
convent  at  Ramleh  same  day  (twelve  miles),  where  we  slqit, 
and  at  two  o'clock  next  day,  with  heavy  rain,  reached 
Jerusalem. 

\Mh^  at  Ilornsteins  Hotel. — Heard  that  Canon  Tristnm 
and  five  other  Englishmen,  travelling  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  Dead  Sea  in  search  of  inscribed  stones,  had  been  kid- 
napped  by  the  sheikh  at  Kerak,  and  impounded  for  a  ransom 
of  £600.  Mr  Moore,  our  Consul,  fearing,  I  suppose,  a  repe- 
tition of  the  Greek  tragedy,  sent  off  the  amount  demanded 
yesterday,  and  to-day  the  Governor  has  despatched  troops  to 
chastise  the  sheikh. 

Ibth. — Asphalt — This  article  is  found  only  occasionallf 
floating  in  small  quantities  on  the  surface  of  the  Dead  Sei 
During  the  past  four  years  only  a  few  hundredweights  hate 
been  collected  and  brought  for  sale  to  Jerusalem  by  the 
Bedaway,  where  it  is  bought,  principally  for  Germany,  at 
about  forty,  shillings  the  hundredweight,  and  is  there  em- 
ployed in  giving  a  lustrous  appearance  to  the  finer  sorts  of 
leather.  It  forms,  or  is  formed,  at  the  bottom  of  the  Deid 
Sea,  and  when  found  floating  on  the  surface,  has  doubtless 
been  detached  from  the  bottom  by  volcanic  commotion. 
The  Dead  Sea,  it  will  be  remembered,  is  between  1300  and 
1400  feet  in  the  deepest  part. 

2\8L — Visited  Mr  Bayley's  school,  in  which  there  ai6 
some  forty  boarders  and  twenty  day-scholars,  nearly  all  the 
sons  of  Jews.  Very  few,  however,  of  the  parents  reside  io 
Jerusalem,  no  Jew  being  found  hardy  enough  to  stand  v\ 
against  or  to  brave  the  persecution  which  he  would  certainl] 
suffer  at  the  hands  of  his  co-religionists  in  the  Holy  Citf 
should  he  be  induced  to  send  his  child  to  a  school  condoctec 
on  Christian  principles.  Several  of  the  children  come  froU 
India,  and  many  from  Syria,  those  belonging  to  JemsaleU 
being  either  orphans  or  the  children  of  proselytes.  Mr 
Bayley,  who  is  an  earnest  and  competent  teacher,  put  the 
children  through  their  facings,  to  show  me  of  what  they 
were  capable,  and  I  was  struck  by  the  cheery  and  lively 
manner  in  which  they  passed  through  their  examination. 
They  first  sung  English  hymns,  then  in  Grerman,  and  ulti- 
mately in  Hebrew.      Mr  Bayley  then  questioned  them  oa 


SCHOOLS  IN  JER  USALEM—JERICHO.  3 1 3 

ittronomy  and  geography,  and  on  both  subjects  they  showed 
that  they  possessed  considerable  knowledge,  as  well  as  in  the 
Tormation  of  short  grammatical  sentences.  Altogether,  the 
exhibition  was  most  creditable  to  Mr  Bayley  and  to  the 
children.  I  was  particularly  struck  by  the  good  looks  of  the 
boys  generally,  and  among  them  were  many  handsome  faces. 
A  few  days  ago,  in  company  with  Mrs  Gobat,  I  paid,  a  visit 
to  the  Bishop's  school,  in  which  there  are  some  forty  boarders 
lod  day-scholars.  I  had  no  opportunity  of  judging  of  the 
•e^oirements  or  proficiency  of  the  boys  in  the  Bishop^s  school, 
bat  in  appearance  they  seemed  to  me  to  be  intellectually  not 
it  all  equal  to  the  Jewish  children  at  Mr  Bayley' s.  In  this 
school  the  children  are  principally  the  sons  of  Arab  Chris- 
tians;  some  Mahometans  there  are  among  them,  and  some 
are  the  children  of  German  parents.  In  both  schools  there 
ire  some  very  young  children,  and  very  few  of  more  than 
fourteen  or  fifteen  years  of  age ;  and  in  both  schools  the 
numbers  have  increased  considerably  of  late;  indeed,  to  such 
a  degree  that  there  is  no  longer  any  room  for  more.  It  is 
dearly  by  teaching  the  young  that  good  can  be  done  in 
Jenifialem,  the  efforts  made  to  convert  the  grown-up  Jews 
proving  rarely  successful. 

23rf,  Jericho. — I  am  here  on  my  way  to  Wady  Humara, 
having  left  Jerusalem  at  noon  to-day.  We  are  encamped 
doae  to  the  miserable  village  of  Jericho,  inhabited  by  the 
neat  degraded  of  all  the  Bedouins.  The  Grand  Duke  of 
Xecklenburg,  with  a  large  retinue,  is  encamped  near  the 
Ain  Sultan.  In  Jerusalem  it  has  been  raining  pretty  nearly 
wery  day  for  the  last  fifteen  days,  and  last  night  very 
copiously.  Here,  for  the  last  fifteen  days,  there  has  been 
bttt  one  shower,  and  that  was  yesterday,  and  it  lasted  only 
for  five  minutes.  The  temperature  is  delightful  now,  and  the 
Dioonlight  lovely  in  the  extreme.  There  are  two  aqueducts 
dose  to  our  encampment  for  bringing  water  from  Ain  el 
Sultan  and  the  Duck  across  Wady  Kelt  for  the  purpose  of 
irr^tion.  The  last  is  broken  and  useless;  the  other  is 
iDade  serviceable  to  the  extent  of  bringing  water  from  Ain 
d  Saltan  to  the  Bedouin  village,  but,  I  believe,  not  in  sufficient 
{oantity  for  irrigation.  There  is  but  a  small  portion  of  the 
and  hereabouts  under  cultivation,  but  the  wheat  grown  here 


314  CJ^OSSING  THE  JORDAN. 

is  full  six  weeks  or  more  more  forward  than  any  I  have  seen 
elsewhere ;  indeed,  I  am  told  that  wheat  here  comes  to  market 
full  two  months  earlier  than  the  wheat  from  any  other  part 
of  Palestine.  The  Government  is  now  about  to  sell  a  large 
portion  of  this  part  of  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  and  there  is 
a  party  contemplating  the  purchase  of  it  for  the  purpose  of 
growing  cotton,  for  which  it  would  seem  the  soil  is  particu- 
larly well  adapted.  Herod  made  a  present  to  Cleopatra  A 
all  the  land  hereabouts,  which  the  Turkish  Govemment  is  now 
offering  for  sale.  Will  it  be  safe  to  purchase  under  suck 
circumstances  ?  Is  it  likely  that  any  of  Cleopatra^s  descen- 
dants will  ever  put  in  a  claim  to  this  laiid?  The  jackals  are 
very  noisy  round  about  here  to-night,  but  their  barking  will 
hardly  keep  me  awake.  We  have  a  couple  of  gentlemen  with 
long  flint-lock  muskets  with  us  as  an  escort;  they  were 
furnished  to  us  by  the  sheikh  of  a  village  close  to  Bethanj, 
as  we  passed  on  our  way  here  from  Jerusalem ;  they  are  oq 
foot,  but  keep  up  with  our  horses  without  difficulty.  The 
road  between  Jericho  and  the  Holy  City  has  been  much  im- 
proved of  late. 

24M,  Imshidiay  GoblarCs  encampmenL — We  did  not  move 
away  from  Jericho  until  eight  o'clock.  An  hour  and  a  half 
took  us  to  the  ford  at  the  Jordan,  about  two  miles  above  the 
pilgrims'  bathing-place.  Here  we  found  a  ferryboat  under 
charge  of  two  negroes  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Tunis,  in 
which  we  passed  over  comfortably  enough  in  three  trips,  with 
our  luggage  and  quadrupeds — four  horses,  two  mules,  and  one 
donkey.  We  found  the  river  pretty  full,  running  smoothly, 
but  somewhat  rapidly,  between  not  very  high  banks,  and  only 
about  twenty  yards  across.  An  iron  bridge  would  be  a  great 
boon  here,  and  easily  constructed.  The  operation  of  cross- 
ing and  making  a  fresh  start  from  this  side  the  river — ^forwe 
had  to  unload  our  mules — delayed  us  an  hour.  Altogether^ 
we  were  only  five  hours  from  Jericho  to  where  we  are  now 
encamped.  After  leaving  Jericho,  for  half  an  hour  before 
reaching  the  river,  the  road  leads  among  high  sandhills, 
with  streaks  of  clay  running  horizontally  through  them,  the 
summit  washed  by  the  rain  of  centuries  into  all  sorts  of 
shapes — castles,  spires,  &c. — and  in  some  places  the  entire 
hill  washed  into  the  form  of  pyramids.    A  somewhi^t  similar 


I 


CULTIVATION  EAST  OF  THE  JORDAN,        315 

form  of  sandhills  we  passed  through  oli  the  eastern  side  of 
the  river,  bnt  not  to  the  same  extent.  The  wheat  and 
barley  grown  on  the  plain  between  Jericho  and  the  river  are 
veiy  forward,  being  aided  in  their  growth  by  irrigation  from 
Aio  el  Saltan  and  the  river  Dack.  In  the  neighbourhood 
of  our  encampment,  too,  there  are  many  patches  of  wheat 
aud  barley  wel>  forward,  and  looking  strong  and  healthy, 
though  somewhat  choked  with  charlock.  All  this  is  the  work 
of  the  Feleheen,  or  farmer  Bedouins,  who  come  here  &om  the 
Tillages  in  which  they  dwell  to  cultivate  the  ground  for  the 
lords  of  the  soil,  and  for  which  they  are  entitled  to  a  fourth 
of  the  crop.  The  true  Bedouin  never  puts  a  spade  in  the 
ground.  Groblan  is  sheikh  of  the  Nimreen  tribe.  In  this 
eDcampment  of  his  there  are  fifty-one  large  black  tents,  on  a 
piece  of  plain  ground  encircled  by  hills.  These  Bedouin  tents 
are  generally  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet  long,  low,  and  with 
a  broad  white  band  running  through  them  from  end  to  end, 
and  some  others  with  more  intricate  white  ornamentation 
also.  In  all  there  may  be  300  persons  in  this  encampment 
There  is  an  abundance  of  young  children,  from  almost  pure 
white  to  something  bordering  in  colour  very  closely  on  the 
negro. 

I  visited  a  hot  spring  on  a  little  hill  a  few  hundred  yards 
from  the  encampment,  issuing  from  the  ground  and  running 
down  the  declivity  in  a  small  stream ;  temperature  96^  On 
an  extensive  plain  at  a  higher  level  than  the  site  of  the 
encampment,  I  went  to  look  at  a  large  stone  standing  alone. 
It  has  been  chiselled  perfectly  round,  flat  on  the  top,  with  a 
round  hole  in  the  centre  25  inches  in  diameter.  This  stone 
measures  120  inches  in  diameter,  and  stands  38  inches  above 
ground.  It  is  buried  only  some  four  or  five  inches.  The 
plain  upon  which  it  stands  is  strewed  with  small  stones,  but 
no  large  ones;  and  what  this  large  stone  was  used  for,  or  how 
it  got  into  its  present  position,  is  hard  to  say. 

25^^ — At  8  A.M.  we  left  Ooblan's  encampment,  and  at 
3  F.iL  we  were  in  the  Wady  Humara,  and  found  the 
granite  pillar  a  good  deal  chipped  round  the  edge.* 

In  coming  here  to-day  we  passed  the  site  of  an  ancient 
edifice,  where  a  few  columns  and  some  building-stone  still 

*  The  author  had  erected  it  on  a  previoua  occasion. 


3i6     DOLMENS--  WADY  ZERKA^DATEPALMS, 

encumber  the  ground.  One  of  the  stones — sandstone,  I 
think — had  an  inscription  on  it,  which  I  copied.  The  Bedomm 
date  back  this  ruin  to  the  time  of  the  Israelites.  We  alio 
passed  by  some  dolmens,  from  five  to  ten  feet  long  and  half 
that  in  breadth,  and  from  five  to  six  feet  in  height,  formei 
of  large  fiat  stones,  roof  and  sides,  with  a  small  opening  at 
one  end.  Only  one  of  these  dolmens  contained  anything, 
and  in  that  one  was  the  skeleton  of  a  Bedouin  with  some 
cotton  cloth  still  covering  the  bones — the  skeleton,  perhaps, 
of  some  poor  creature  who  in  sickness  had  taken  shelter  and 
died  there.  Thinking  that  the  skull  could  be  no  long«  of 
any  service  to  the  rest  of  the  bones,  I  took  the  libertjr  A 
bringing  it  away  with  me,  for  it  is  not  every  day  that  one 
meets  with  a  disposable  Bedouin  skull. 

The  road,  if  it  can  be  called  a  road,  between  this  and  the 
Jordan^  is  seldom  travelled  by  any  one  but  shepherds.  It 
passes  for  the  most  part  over  basalt,  partially  covered  by  an 
incrustation  resembling  oxide  of  iron,  exactly  the  same  fo^ 
mation  as  I  have  seen  on  the  N.W.  coast  of  Tasmanii 
The  dolmens,  or  stone  chambers,  date  back  to  the  time  of 
Lot !     So  say  the  Bedouins. 

26M. — We  were  very  early  in  the  saddle  this  morning,  on 
our  way  to  Wady  Zerka,  to  visit  the  hot  springs  of  Callirhoc, 
famous  as  having  been  resorted  to  by  Herod.  We  rode  all  fl»e 
way — at  least  I  and  Goblan  did — and  at  10  A.]if.  we  reached 
the  springs.  The  road  is  rough  enough,  but  the  descent  into  the 
valley  is  precipitous  in  the  extreme ;  so  much  so,  that  ont 
of  our  party,  consisting  of  our  dragoman  and  four  Bedooini, 
Goblan  and  myself  were  the  only  ones  that  preferred  riding 
to  leading  their  horses.  These  hot  springs  appeared  to  me 
to  start  from  the  mountain-side,  about  500  feet  above  the 
river  that  flows  through  the  wady  into  the  Dead  Sea.  b 
the  gully  by  which  we  descended  into  the  wady  there  are 
two  distinct  springs,  which  become  one  at  the  bottom^  fonn- 
ing  respectable  cascades  in  more  than  one  place^  rushing 
down  the  hill  with  great  rapidity  in  a  stream  from  one  to  two 
yards  wide  generally,  though  in  one  or  two  places  narrowing 
to  less  than  a  yard.  Following  the  line  of  these  springs  are 
several  hundreds  of  date-palms  growing,  strong  and  health/. 
There  is  one  more  hot  spring  gushing  from  the  mounttio' 


HOT  SPRINGS  OF  CALLIRHOE.  317 

side  like  the  other  two,  and  of  about  the  same  capacity,  a 
few  hnndred  yards  down  the  wady,  and  there  may  be  others 
still  lower  down,  nearer  the  sea ;  but  higher  up  it  is  clear  there 
are  none  of  any  consequence,  for  the  temperature  of  the 
stream  running  through  the  wady  is  only  85%  whilst  the 
temperature  of  the  main  body  of  the  hot  springs,  just  before 
entering  the  stream  at  the  bottom,  is  127°,  and  a  little  higher 
up  136* ;  and  in  the  second  spring  into  which  I  put  the  thermo- 
meter, at  the  highest  point  to  which  I  could  trace  it  starting 
from  the  rock,  it  marked  142°.  Wherever  any  of  the  long 
grass  growing  on  the  edge  of  the  hot'Spring  stream  dipped 
into  it,  a  substance  like  chalk  in  appearance  had  formed 
around  it,  in  some  instances  of  the  size  and  shape  of  a  pear. 
I  tasted  this  water,  but  could  detect  nothing  in  it  differing 
from  ordinary  sweet  water;  neither  does  the  deposit  upon 
the  rashes  or  long  grass  that  grow  on  its  borders,  and  dip 
into  it,  possess  any  taste.  These  springs  are  a  sealed  book 
to  most  people.  My  first  visit  to  them  was  in  1868.  Strange 
enoagh,  whilst  we  were  resting  there  to-day,  four  Bedouins 
and  three  women  made  their  appearance,  bringing  with  them 
a  sick  man  on  a  mule  to  test  their  curative  efficacy.  They 
brought  with  them  a  lamb  to  serve  them  during  their  stay 
in  the  wady. 

Onr  descent  into  the  wady  was  something  like  1500  feet. 
Both  sides  are  very  precipitate,  particidarly  the  western  side, 
which,  as  far  as  I  could  see,  was  nearly,  if  not  quite,  perpen- 
dicular in  the  part  opposite  these  springs ;  principally  brown 
and  yellow  sandstone,  with  an  admixture  of  black  basalt. 
After  leaving  the  wady,  and  getting  again  on  high  ground, 
we  rode  towards  the  Dead  Sea,  and  got  as  near  to  it  as  the 
perpendicular  cliffs,  which  in  this  part  run  along  at  a  dis- 
tance from  it  of  two  to  three  miles,  would  permit.  We  had 
a  good  view  of  the  whole  lake.  We  could  see  the  low  spits 
that  jut  into  the  west  end,  and  the  stream  of  the  Jordan 
mnning  in  at  the  east,  and  the  cultivated  gardens  which 
project  into  the  lake  at  the  mouth  of  the  Zerka  main.  The 
lake  itself  was  as  calm  as  a  mill-pond. 

The  scene  of  devastation,  caused  by  some  convulsion  of 
nature,  which  presented  itself  between  where  we  stood,  on  a 
perpendicular  cliff  some  1000  feet  above  the  sea,  and  the  sea 


3 1 8  lyjJDV  HUMARA—EHAAfA. 

itself,  was  very  imposiDg.  The  jamble  of  hills  of  all  shapeS) 
formed  principally  of  sandstone  and  basalt,  could  only  be 
the  result  of  volcanic  action. 

27M. — At  8  A.M.  we  were  in  the  saddle,  leaving  "Wady 
Humara,  arrived  at  our  encampment  at  2.30  p.il  On  the 
way  we  struck  down  to  the  Dead  Sea,  and  came  along  its 
shore  for  three  or  four  miles.  The  men  of  our  troop  took 
advantage  of  the  occasion  to  bathe,  and  some  of  them  bathed 
their  horses  also.  The  water  of  the  Dead  Sea  is  so  buoyant 
that  a  man  floats  with  both  arms  and  feet,  and  his  head  and 
neck  quite  out  of  the  water.  The  water  is  perfectly  dear, 
and  the  bottom  sandy.  The  shore,  at  least  five  feet  aboie 
where  the  water  reached  to-day,  was  lined  with  driftwood 
brought  down  by  the  Jordan.  I  picked  up  two  crabs  on  tbe 
beach,  dead  of  course ;  they  must  be  land-crabs.  The  water 
is  very  bitter  and  very  salt.  The  weather  has  been  warmer 
to-day.  In  my  tent  at  Wady  Humara  the  thermometer 
stood  at  56'',  and  even  at  Callirhoe  it  only  got  up  at  noon 
yesterday  to  70**.  To-day,  in  the  sun,  it  reached  104*,  and 
in  this  tent  81°.  In  the  wadies  we  passed  to-day  we  sat 
many  date-palms,  and  particularly  in  one  which  we  rounded 
at  its  head,  where  the  sides  were  perpendicular  and  thewadf 
from  200  to  300  feet  deep,  the  palms  were  growing  as  thick 
as  they  could  stick  on  the  grounds.  We  have  pitched  ow 
camp  at  Rhama,  between  two  encampments  of  what  GoUan 
calls  his  slaves.  There  are  many  negroes  among  them,  and 
intermarriage  with  the  Arab  women  has  produced  a  motley 
race.  In  the  two  encampments  there  are  at  least  300  people, 
and  nowhere  among  the  Bedouins  have  I  seen  so  large  a 
proportion  of  children.  I  have  just  been  treated  to  an  ex- 
hibition of  dancing  by  both  men  and  women,  but  in  separate 
l)arties,  and  afterwards  witnessed  a  free  fight  among  tbe 
women  over  the  money  I  had  given  them.  They  are  a 
hideous  lot,  the  cross  between  the  slaves  and  the  Arab 
women ;  and  the  women  contrive  to  increase  their  ugliness 
by  dyeing  their  lips,  old  and  young,  blue  with  indigo,  which 
is  produced  here,  but  only,  I  believe,  in  small  quantity,  and 
of  very  inferior  quality.  These  slaves,  as  Goblan  calls  them, 
are  the  farmers  of  the  tribe ;  they  do  the  principal  part  of 
the  tillage,  though  I  nm  told  there  are  besides  some  twenty- 


A  SHEIKHS  TOMB^RUINS— AQUEDUCTS.     319 

five  families  in  his  tribe  who  are  very  poor^  and  who  in  con- 
seqnence  of  their  poverty  till  their  own  ground  themselves. 
This,  however,  is  not  common  among  the  Bedouins,  for  they 
are  either  too  lazy  or  too  proud  to  do  any  work  if  they  can 
help  it 

28/^1  Ain  el  Sultan. — We  left  our  encampment  at  Bhama 
this  morning,  accompanied  by  Ooblan  and  sixteen  of  his 
tribe :  in  half  an  hour  we  were  on  Tell  Bhama,  on  the  sum- 
mit of  which  is  a  tomb  of  a  sheikh  who  was  killed  some  ten 
years  ago  in  a  fight  with  the  Government  troops.  There  are 
just  the  remains  of  a  building  at  the  foot  of  the  Tell,  and  a 
red  granite  or  porphyry  pillar  stands  about  four  feet  above 
ground ;  it  is  about  fifteen  inches  in  diameter.  There  is  no 
Bach  stone  as  this  pillar  is  made  of  anywhere  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood, and  it  must  have  been  brought  from  afar.  It  is 
08  fine  grained  as  much  of  the  best  Aberdeen  granite.  It  is 
round,  with  a  rim  encircling  the  top,  which  has  been  some- 
what chipped;  the  Bedouins  say  it  is  Israelitish.  Further 
on  upon  the  plain,  near  the  Tell  of  Eafereen,  I  saw  two  more 
columns,  now  standing  above  ground  only  about  three  feet ; 
these  are  of  sandstone,  round,  and  some  eighteen  inches  in 
diameter.  Their  relative  position  looks  as  if  they  once  served 
as  doorposts  to  the  entrance  of  some  important  building. 
One  of  them  had  a  hole  in  the  centre  of  the  top.  On  our 
way  over  the  plain  towards  the  Jordan,  we  must  have  passed 
some  hundreds  of  acres  of  wheat,  belonging  to  the  Nimreen 
tribe,  of  which  Goblan  is  sheikh.  The  plain  is  very  extensive, 
and  the  sown  part  of  it  is  irrigated  by  water  drawn  from  the 
river  Bhama.  The  remains  of  more  than  one  aqueduct  still 
exist  on  this  plain,  which  in  olden  time  was  no  doubt  all 
under  cultivation.  It  slopes  gently  from  the  foot  of  the 
hills,  down  pretty  close  to  the  Jordan,  which  must  be  distant 
from  the  hills  some  five  or  six  miles.  Altogether  Goblan's 
tribe  must  have  1000  acres  under  wheat.  The  upper  part  of 
the  plain  is  pretty  well  shaded  with  doab-trees,  under  which 
the  wheat  is  sown,  for  where  they  grow  is  the  best  ground. 
Besides  the  Bhama,  there  is  the  river  Kafereen,  and  another 
also  running  through  this  plain.  In  the  three  encampments 
which  we  have  seen,  I  counted  120  tents,  that  could  not  con- 
tain less  than  600  persons,  and  I  nowhere  saw  an  inch  of 


320  JERICHO  MOUNDS^RETURN  TO  JERUSALEM. 

garden-ground.  With  an  industrious  population,  all  this 
plain,  or  Ghor  of  Rhama,  as  it  is  called,  might  be  made  highly 
productive,  as  it  must  have  been  in  times  gone  by,  if  one 
may  judge  by  the  remains  of  aqueducts  which  still  exist 
Here,  too,  close  to  where  we  are  now  encamped,  in  the  valley 
of  the  Jordan,  are  the  remains  of  two  considerable  aquedncta. 
The  cultivation  hereabouts  is  limited  to  a  few  patches  d 
wheat.  Arrived  at  the  ford  this  morning,  we  paid  ofT  a  dozen 
of  our  Bedouins,  and  got  rid  of  them.  We  have  still  with 
us  Qoblan  and  four  others.  As  we  came  along,  we  went  ovt 
of  our  way  to  look  at  the  apse  of  a  church,  and  the  walk  of 
some  other  buildings,  laid  bare  by  Captain  Warren ;  and  sinoe 
we  have  been  encamped  I  have  been  examining  his  excsTt- 
tions  in  the  famous  Jericho  mounds.  I  observed  in  them  the 
remains  of  sunburnt  bricks  all  through  the  excavations,  and 
in  one  place  there  is  a  whole  pile  of  them.  I  took  a  handfiil 
of  the  earth  of  which  the  mounds  are  composed,  and  found 
no  difficulty  in  forming  it  into  a  good  brick.  From  what  I 
have  seen  to-day,  I  am  more  convinced  than  ever  that  these 
Jericho  mounds  have  the  same  origin  as  similar-looking 
mounds  in  old  Delhi,  Agra,  and  other  parts  of  India  are 
known  to  have — viz.,  the  debris  of  brick-kilns.  Among  the 
rubbish  in  one  of  the  cuttings  we  hunted  a  formidable- 
looking  snake,  but  he  escaped  from  us.  The  principal  mounds 
here  stand  right  over  the  splendid  spring  of  water  called 
Ain  el  Sultan,  or  Elisha's  Fountain,  and  therefore  the  spot 
is  well  chosen  for  making  bricks. 

29thj  HornsteirCs  Ilotelj  Jerusalem. — We  struck  our  tents 
at  Ain  el  Sultan  at  3  a.m.,  and  were  moving  on  our  way 
towards  the  Holy  City  just  as  the  morning  star  rose  above 
the  mountains  of  Moab.  It  was  half-past  four ;  the  sky 
clear,  and  a  bright  moon  shining.  We  made  one  stoppage 
on  the  road  for  about  an  hour,  and  at  11  a.m.  entered  Jeru- 
salem. 

March  MK — The  English  cemetery  fourteen  years  ago  was 
situated  on  the  Jaffa  road,  and  was  unenclosed.  A  finnan 
from  the  Sultan  was  sought  to  be  obtained  permitting  it  to 
be  enclosed,  but  when  the  firman  reached  Jerusalem,  it  was 
found  to  be  granted  only  on  condition  that  no  one  objected 
to   the   enclosure.      The    Mahometans   opposed   it   on  two 


SCHOOL  IN  JER USALEM-^  BOY  DRO WNED,    3 2 r 

grounds :  first,  because  in  burying  their  own  dead  they  bad  to 
pass  our  cemetery ;  and  secondly^  at  one  honr  of  the  day  the 
shadow  of  the  minaret  of  one  of  the  mosques  of  the  city 
fell  upon  it,  and  the  mosque  was  defiled  thereby ! 

I  visited  Miss  Dickson's  school  to->day.  It  is  for  girls 
odIy,  the  daughters  of  Jews  and  Jewish  proselytes.  At  pres- 
ent, the  school  contains  seventeen  boarders,  and  upwards  of 
fifty  day-scholars.  Very  few  of  the  parents  of  the  boarders 
reside  in  Jerusalem.  They  all  read  the  Bible,  and  still 
there  is  no  attempt  made  to  convert  them  to  Christianity. 
Unless  they  be  the  children  of  proselytes,  they  generally 
return  to  their  home  Jewesses,  and  soon  after  marry  Jews. 
Still  there  is  a  deal  of  good  done  by  Miss  Dickson's  train- 
ing ;  and  the  girls  on  leaving  her  school  generally  command 
hnshands  from  among  the  better  class  of  Jews,  and  their 
houses  afterwards  are  invariably  more  cleanly  and  better 
kept  than  the  houses  of  those  Jewesses  who  have  never  had 
the  advantage  of  Miss  Dickson's  training.  Some  of  the 
children  are  taught  English  and  German,  and  others  only  to 
read  and  write  in  Arabic.  In  one  room  I  saw  twenty  married 
Jewesses  doing  difierent  sorts  of  needlework,  and  making 
lace  and  embroidery.  The  work  is  generally  ordered  before- 
hand, and  these  women  are  paid  for  their  labour.  I  saw 
many  pretty  faces  among  the  children.  The  rooms,  all  of 
them,  dormitories  included,  are  models  of  cleanliness. 

7M. — Yesterday  two  casualties  occurred  in  Jerusalem.  A 
Iwy — a  very  naughty  boy,  I  am  told — had  been  tied  to  a  post 
and  flogged  by  his  father,  and  had  been  left  tied  up  all  night, 
with  a  threat  that  he  should  be  flogged  again  in  the  morning. 
When  morning  came,  however,  the  boy  was  missing,  he  had 
clipped  out  of  the  rope.  Two  days  passed,  and  the  boy  did 
iiot  put  in  an  appearance.  A  search  was  made  for  him,  and 
he  was  found  drowned  at  the  bottom  of  a  well.  The  other 
casualty  was  that  of  a  young  man,  who  was  either  about  to 
be  forced  by  his  father  to  marry  a  girl  who  did  not  possess 
his  affections,  or  who  was  not  permitted  to  marry  the  girl 
he  had  himself  chosen.  I  do  not  know  which  of  these  two 
cases  was  the  real  one,  but  certain  it  is  that  the  young  man 
was  in  despair,  and  to  get  out  of  his  trouble  he  discharged  a 
loaded  musket,  as  he  thought,  into  his  stomach,  but  the  ball 

X 


j 
1 


322    ATTEMPT  A T  SUICIDE— GERMAN  COLONY. 

compassionately  Btruck  his  lower  ribs  and  thenoe  paued 
right  round  his  body  to  his  back,  from  which  point  it  iia 
cut  out  by  Dr  Chaplin's  assistant.  The  boy  and  the  yonng 
man  were  both  Mahometans.  I  am  told  that  when  a  young 
Jew  is  about  to  be  married,  it  devolves  on  his  mother  to  pro- 
vide an  outfit  for  the  bride,  and,  as  a  sort  of  return,  the  boh 
considers  himself  bound  to  take  care  of  his  mother  in  her  old 
age.  There  is  nothing  like  our  poor-rate,  or  substitute  for 
it,  levied  in  Jerusalem,  so  that  the  helpless  and  destitote 
among  the  Jews  wholly  depend  upon  their  relations  ud 
alms  for  subsistence.  There  is  great  misery  among  flu 
Jews  here.  I  was  told  by  a  lady  that  she  had  gone  into  t 
room  in  the  Jews'  quarter  and  found  three  or  four  old  women 
huddled  together  crouching  on  the  floor,  whom  she  absolutely 
took  at  first  for  so  many  bundles  of  old  rags  I 

lOM,  Jaffa. — I  left  Jerusalem  yesterday  at  7  A.11.,  ta' 
owing  to  delay  caused  by  the  muleteer  with  baggage,  I  did 
not  arrive  here  until  9  p.m.  The  weather  waa  verypleii- 
ant,  not  at  all  too  warm.  From  the  top  of  the  hiU,  jurt 
above  Kirjeath- Jearim,  to  the  foot  of  it  at  Babel  Wad,  tbereii 
a  descent  of  1400  feet,  and  to  Jaffa  a  descent  of  2300  feet, 
which  makes  Babel  Wad  about  900  feet  above  Jaffa  on  the  Ifc* 
diterranean.  These  heights  are  by  aneroid,  and  conseqoentlj 
may  not  be  quite  true.  Tlie  hotel  at  which  I  am  located  ii 
called  the  American  Colony  in  Jaffa,  but  which  is  no  longO 
an  American,  but  a  German  colony  of  the  Christian  Sect  of 
the  Temple,  an  offshoot  from  a  colony  of  that  sect  establiiM 
for  some  years  at  Haifa,  a  port  situated  at  the  foot  of  Mount 
Carmel.  The  hotel  is  conducted  by  Mr  Hardegg,  and,  for 
Jaffa,  supplies  fairly  all  the  comforts  that  visitors  to  thii 
rough  land  have  any  right  to  expect.  Mr  Hardegg  to- 
day, Sunday,  assisted  in  waiting  on  his  guests  at  the 
dinner-table,  and  this  evening  was  employed  with  all  to 
household  in  their  devotions.  Mr  Hardegg  is  at  present  tk 
representative  here  of  the  American  Government  In  talk- 
ing with  him  about  the  disgraceful  state  of  the  English 
cemetery  here,  he  told  me  that  one  of  his  children  had  been 
interred  in  that  cemetery,  and  that  a  tomb  had  been  placed 
over  the  grave,  but  it  had  been  so  pulled  to  pieces  that  % 
year  ago  he  had  disinterred  the  body  and  buried  it  elsewheit 


CEMETERY  AT  JAFFA-^THE  TEMPLE  SECT.   323 

Tills  bnrial-gronnd,  I  have  before  observed,  is  exposed  to 
everj  sort  of  desecration  from  bipeds  and  quadrupeds. 
Camels  are  frequently  tied  up  to  the  gravestones,  and  men 
and  boys  amuse  themselves  in  destroying  the  monuments 
which  have  been  set  up  by  the  friends  of  the  dead  that  lie 
there.  The  Temple  Sect  rent  and  cultivate  a  considerable 
extent  of  land  at  Haifa,  much  to  the  disgust  of  the  monks 
living  on  Mount  Carmel,  one  of  whom,  in  preaching  to  his 
flock  not  long  since,  said  that  God  had  sent  a  plague  of 
locnsts  in  hopes  of  turning  them  from  their  sinful  ways,  but 
they  remained  impenitent ;  He  then  punished  them  by 
sending  the  cholera  among  them,  but  this  warning,  too,  they 
ilisregarded ;  and  now  He  had  sent  the  greatest  plague  of  all 
—a  colony  of  German  Protestants. 

11^ — Before  starting  for  Alexandretta  this  morning,  I 
paid  another  visit  to  the  desolated  and  desecrated  English 
cemetery,  the  property  of  the  British  Government.     I  found 
it  occupied,   the  clear  part  of  it,  by  half-a-dozen  tents  of 
travellers,    and    among  the    graves  and   tombs   ranged  at 
pleasure  camels,  horses,  mules,  donkeys,  and  Arabs.     The 
place  is  a   desolation — the  graves   literally  destroyed ;  the 
ordinary  tombstones  still  existing  unbroken,  but  many,  I  am 
told,  have  been  carried  off  bodily  by  the  Arabs.     One  hand- 
some monument  of  the  hardest  of  red  granite,  placed  there 
by  Sir  M.  Montifiore  to  mark  the  spot  where  his  medical 
fnend,  Thomas  Hodgkin,  was  interred,  still  stands  upright, 
though  it  has  had  to  bear  the  tug  of  many  a  camel  made 
fast  to  it     The  double  rows  of  cactus  that  once  enclosed  the 
cemetery  have  nearly  all  disappeared  on  one  side.      It  must 
have  been  destroyed  by  a  Boman  Catholic  Arab,  who  has 
l>uilt  a   large   storehouse,   part  of  which  they  say  stands 
OQ  an   encroachment   on    the    cemetery.      The   remainder 
^^  the  cactus   hedge  has  been  destroyed  by  the   animals 
that  have  been  allowed  to  wander  over  it  unrestrained   at 
their  pleasure.     At  the  date  of  the  interment  of  Mr  Hard- 
^g's  child,  about  three  years  ago,  a  good  gate,  with  a  lock 
upon  it,  the  key  of  which  was  lodged  with  our  consular 
agent,  who  from  his  house  must  have  witnessed  the  gradual 
deatmction  and  desecration  of  the  place  by  bipeds  and  quad- 
i^peds,  as  well  as  the  said*to-be  encroachment  made  on  the 


324   TRIPOLI^LATTAKIA^ABOORICO  TOBACCO. 

cemetery  about  a  year  ago  by  the  building  of  the  Bomin 
Catholic  Arab  when  in  progress.  All  this  he  must  have  wit- 
nessed, and  apparently  permitted,  without  making  a  single  effort 
to  stay  the  destruction,  for  he  had  only  to  raise  his  voice  when 
animals  began  to  break  down  the  cactus  hedge  to  have  pre- 
served the  enclosure  intact  as  it  was  when  placed  under  hit 
charge.  I  cannot  understand  this  conduct  on  the  part  of  one 
in  charge  of  the  British  Consulate,  whose  duty  it  is  clearly  in 
this  country,  more  so  than  in  most  others,  perhaps,  to  hife 
preserved  from  spoliation  such  property  as  a  cemetery  be- 
longing to  the  British  Grovernment.  In  some  way  or  other 
this  piece  of  ground  once  forming  the  cemetery  was  sold  to 
a  Mr  Gibbs.  The  English  residents  complained  that  thej 
were  deprived  of  their  burial-ground,  when  Mr  Gibbs  giw 
up  about  half  an  acre  to  them,  and  it  is  this  half  acre  wfaick  \ 
forms  the  present  wretched  cemetery,  of  which  every  Englidi*  \ 
man  who  passes  by  and  sees  must  feel  ashamed. 

Wth. — Yesterday  I  was  on  shore  all  day  at  Tripoli  with  Mr 
Beattie.     The  day  previous  I  passed  at  Beyrout.     We  breik- 
fasted  at  Mr  Jessop's,  also  an  American  missionary,  and  afte^ 
wards  rode  with  him  to  see  the  town,  two  miles  distant  from 
the  marine  port.       Tripoli  is  situated  on  a  spit  of  land  pro- 
truding from  the  mainland  into  the  sea,  which  might,  withoot 
much  cutting,  be  made  into  an  island.    The  town  contains  some 
20,000  inhabitants,  of  whom  a  large  portion  are  ChristianB.  to 
exports  consist  of  cotton,  wool,  soap,  olive  oil,  and  fruit    Its 
gardens  are  extensive,  mostly  consisting  of  oranges,  almonds, 
and  peaches.     Oranges  (the  windfalls)  maybe  bought  for  im- 
mediate use  sometimes  as  low  as  forty  for  a  penny.    We  left 
Tripoli  at  midnight,  and  arrived  at  Lattakia,  where  we  are 
now  at  anchor,  at  six  o'clock.     I  have  been  on  shore  with  Mr 
Beattie,  who  leaves  us  here,  and  have  just  returned  on  board, 
bringing  with  me  a  few  pounds  of  Aboorico,  or  smoked  to- 
bacco.    I  am  told  this  Lattakia  tobacco  owes  its  superioritf 
to  all  other  tobacco  grown  on  the  coast  to  the  operation  of 
smoking,  which  is  performed  upon  it  by  burning  underneath 
it,  when  hung  up  to  dry,  an  odoriferous  wood  common  in  the 
mountains  where  the  tobacco  is  grown.     Accident  first  dii* 
covered  the  value  of  this  process,  which  is  now  followed  with 
all  or  the  greater  part  of  the  tobacco  grown  in  the  mouDtaina. 


MUSAIRIYCH  AND  ISMAILIYCH  PAGANS.  .  325 

Tbb  place,  like  Tripoli,  is  an  open  roadstead.  Here,  too, 
the  principal  exports  are  cotton  or  wool,  besides  tobacco. 
The  population  in  and  around  the  town  may  be  20,000,  in* 
clnding  5000  nearly  all  Boman  Catholics. 

The  Musairiych  and  the  Ismailiych  pagans,  numbering 
some  250,000  souls,  inhabit  the  mountains,  a  wild  untutored 
race,  divided  into  orders,  some  worshipping  the  sun,  and 
others  the  moon.  There  is  great  secrecy  or  mystery  about 
their  religious  rites  and  ceremonies.  The  efforts  of  the 
American  missionaries  are  directed,  by  the  help  of  schools 
and  otherwise,  to  the  civilisation  of  these  wild  people,  but  I 
am  afraid  they  have  hitherto  made  but  little  progress  in  the 
work. 

The  only  steamers  that  call  here  now  are  the  French  boats, 
oDe  np  and  the  other  down  the  coast^ weekly — in  fact,  both 
ways.  The  range  of  the  Lebanon  mountains,  all  along  the 
coast  from  this  to  Beyrout,  is  covered  with  snow  down  to  a 
line  about  7000  feet  high.  Just  over  and  in  from  Tripoli, 
is  the  summit  of  the  range,  nearly  11,000  feet  high,  a  little 
exceeding  the  height  of  Hermon.  The  famous  cedars  are 
distant  from  Tripoli  about  nine  hours'  ride. 

On  the  14th,  at  noon,  we  steamed  away  from  Lattakia,  and 
anchored  at  Alexandretta  seven  hours  afterwards.  It  was 
then  blowing  a  pretty  strong  breeze  right  off  the  land  from 
the  east  It  was  too  late  to  expect  any  boats  off  that  night, 
and  next  morning  it  was  blowing  so  strong  in  gusts  that 
none  ventured  off  even  then.  In  the  afternoon  the  wind 
moderated,  and  we  got  ashore.  I  had  no  difficulty  in  finding 
Mr  Tdtarachi's  residence,  a  mud  hut,  like  nearly  all  the 
hooses  in  Iskanderun,  but  where  I  was  received  with  a 
genuine  welcome.  Mr  Tatarachi  (to  whom  I  had  a  letter 
from  his  brother  at  Beyrout),  his  partner,  a  doctor,  and  the 
doctor's  uncle,  all  of  them  from  Constantinople,  Greeks, 
vied  with  each  other  in  showing  me  attention.  With  their 
assistance  I  hired  a  horse  for  myself,  and  a  mule  to  carry  my 
Inggage ;  and  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  I  left  Iskanderun  for 
Beilan,  about  nine  miles  distant,  on  the  road  to  Aleppo,  ac- 
companied by  a  muleteer.  A  ride  of  two  and  a  half  hours 
brought  us  to  Beilan,  a  town  of  stone  houses,  principally  with 
flat  roofs,  all  stuck  upon  the  two  steep  sides  of  a  deep  ravine. 


326  PROTESTANTS  AT  BEIL AN— TURKISH  KHAN, 

and  there  look  like    so    many  monster  birdcages   grouped 
together,  of  which  I  am  told  200  are  inhabited  by  Armenians, 
and  the  remaining  300  (for  they  say  there  are  500  of  them 
in  all)   by  Turks,  barring  some  three  houses  occupied  bf 
native  Protestants.     I  put  up  for  the  night  in  the  house  of  one 
of  these  Protestant  families,  and  was  present  at  the  eveoing 
service  in  the  large  room  of  the  house,  which  consisted  of 
singing  hymns  and  reading  prayers — a  son  of  JakooVs  (my 
host)  performing  the  part  of  minister.     The  family  consisted 
of  six  men,  four  women,  and  two  children,  who  all  took  put 
in  the  service,  which  was  performed  with  considerable  deTont- 
ness.      There  are  five-and-twenty  families  of  these  Protes- 
tants in  Beilan,  presided  over  by  a  native  missionary.    Jakoob 
entertains  travellers,  and  is  very  attentive   to  their  wants. 
He  gave  me  for  supper  a  dish  of  boiled  rice  and  some  boiled 
eggs,  with  a  good  cup  of  tea,  and  in  the  early  morning  some 
tea ;  and  for  all,  and  my  lodging  on  a  mat,  I  paid  five  francs. 
At  6  A.M.  I  was  in  the  saddle,  and  after  having  overtakei 
the  caravan,  rode  on  with  it  until  we  reached  a  khan  called 
Ain  Beta,  at  4  p.m.     In  the  yard  of  this  khan  there  must 
have  been  at  least  1000  cargo-beasts  gathered  together  to 
pass  the  night.     On  my  arrival  I  took  up  a  position  on  i 
wide   shelf  or  platform  which  surrounded  the  sides  of  tht 
large  room  of  the  khan  for  the  accommodation  of  travelleis, 
and  passed  the  night  upon  it  in  my  boots,  in  company  witk 
many  Turks.     In  one  corner  of  this  large  room  was  a  small 
shop,  from  which  the  travellers  were  supplied  with  eggs  and 
coffee,  and  some  Turkish  delicacies.     In  the  middle  of  the 
room  was  a  fire,  the  smoke  finding  its  way  out  throngh  the 
many  apertures  in  the  roof  and  sides,  at  which  cooking  went 
on  until  late   in  the  night;    and  around  the  fire  Turkish 
muleteers  and  travellers,  squatted  upon   their  haunches  or 
seated  on  low  stools,  kept  up,  even  into  the  small  hours  <^ 
morning,  very  lively  discussions.      I  supped  from  my  own 
basket  of  provisions.     I  had  laid  in  at  Alexandretta  hard 
eggs,  a  roasted  fowl,  and  some  bread ;  so  I  only  paid  in  the 
morning,  before  starting,  at  the  khan,  for  my  lodging  on  the 
shelf  and  some  coffee,  one  franc.     We  were  off  at  five  o'doct 
At  nine  we  pulled  up  at  a  roadside  inn,  and  had  a  breakfast 
of  fried  eggs  and  coffee,  and  at  2  p.m.  we  arrived  at  Termini, 


TERMINI— ROAD  TO  ALEPPO-^CULTIVATION.   327 

sod  put  up  for  the  night     Our  accommodation  consisted  of 
an  extensive  vaulted  half-underground  place  for  the  quadru- 
pedfly  and  a  raised  dais,  on  one  side  of  a  large  door  by  which 
ire  all  entered,  for  the  bipeds.     I  bought  a  chicken  for  five 
piastres  (tenpence),  and  had  a  savoury  dish  made  of  it  by  the 
good  woman  of  the  house.     Here  our  caravan,  consisting  of 
eighteen  horses,  mules,  and  donkeys,  and  five  men,  had  the 
place  to  ourselves,  so  I  was  enabled  to  indulge  in  the  luxury 
of  pulling  off  my  boots  before  I  lay  down  to  rest,  without 
danger  of  having  them  stolen  during  the  night.     The  morn* 
ing  of  the  19th  was  wet,  so  we  were  not  fairly  away  from 
Termini  before  six  o'clock,  and  at  3  p.m.  we  reached  Aleppo, 
haying  been  travelling  thirty-one  hours   at   caravan-pace, 
•boat  three  miles  an  hour,  certainly  not  more,  if  quite  so 
Qnch,  for  the  road  in  many  parts  is  very  rough.     Aleppo  is 
wrenty  miles  east  of  Iskanderun.     The  greatest  height  on 
tlM  road  between  the  two  places  is  about  2000  feet,  Aleppo 
ibelf  being  about  1200  feet  above  the  sea.     There  is  con- 
nderable  cultivation   on  the  plains  or  valleys  one  passes 
through,  and  in  parts  on  the  hilly  land  also.     Wheat  and 
beans  are  the  only  crops  above  ground  at  present,  but  the 
plough  is  busily  at  work  all  along  the  road  preparing  the 
gnmad  for  the  sowing  of  maize  and  cotton.     Springs  are 
innumerable,  in    most    cases    the   water    gushing   out   in 
plentifal  streams  from  the  foot  of  the  mountains.    Across 
the  Issus  is  a  long  Roman  road,  still  used  in  winter,  and 
lererai  bridges,  broken  down  and  useless.     The  Turks  never 
repair  anything.     One  passes  over  many  miles  of  very  rocky 
road,  which  reaches  close  up  to  the  city.     Between  Beilan 
and  Aleppo  some  dozen  or  more  villages  come  in  sight,  but 
the  road  passes  through  only  one  of  them.  Termini.     Arti- 
ficial mounds  are  numerous.     I  rode  to  the  top  of  one  skirted 
by  the  caravan-road.    Some  one,  I  observed,  had  been  digging 
into  it,  but  had  not  reached  to  any  great  depth.     On  ap- 
proaching Aleppo,  the  Castle  Hill  is  a  prominent  object, 
dwarfing  by  its  height  all  the  buildings  of  the  city.     It  is  a 
mile  round  at  the  base,  and  is  200  feet  high.     It  stands  at 
the  north-east  corner  of  the  walled  city.      The  houses  of 
Aleppo  are  all  built  of  stone. 
1\9U — The  city  cootains,  so   says    Mr    Skeene,   100,000 


328        ALEPPO— AK  DEJARIN— CULTIVATION. 

inhabitants,  of  whom  60,000  maj  be  Turks  and  40,000 
Christians.  The  whole  trade  of  the  place  amounts  to  foar 
millions  of  pounds  sterling  annually.  There  are  no  banb 
here,  and  money  is  worth  three  per  cent  per  month,  and,witk 
unexceptionable  security,  two  per  cent,  per  month.  The  legal 
rate  of  interest  is  one  per  cent,  per  month,  and  sales  of  goodi 
are  usually  made  at  a  credit  of  three  months.  Mr  Skeeoe 
tells  me  there  are  few  or  no  failures  among  the  shopkeepen 
of  Aleppo.  If  a  man  gets  behind,  it  arises  generally  from 
misfortune,  and  a  compromise  is  usually  the  result,  or  mae 
time  for  payment  is  allowed.  The  usurers  or  money-lend»i 
have  successfully  opposed  the  establishment  of  a  bank. 

23rf. — We  left  Aleppo  at  8  a.m.  and  arrived  at  Ak  Dejaria 
at  2  P.M.,  distance  about  twenty-eight  miles  ;  on  camels  tbe 
time  would  be  nine  hours.     The  country  between  this  and 
Aleppo  may  be  called  a  plain,  partly  rocky ;  but  the  greater 
part  of  it  is  rich  land,  now  under  wheat,  sown  in  drills,  asd 
looking  well.     The  plough  is  at  work  scratching  the  land  and 
making  it  ready  for  a  sowing  of  maize — the  doab,  I  think, 
such  as  is  grown  in  many  parts  of  India.     A  yellow  buochf 
flower  with  a  lupin  leaf  is  almost  the  only  weed  among  the 
wheat.    The  bulb  of  this  yellow  flower  is  dried,  and  generally 
used  as  fuel,  for  wood  is  very  scarce.     After  getting  clear  of 
Aleppo,  on  the  whole  line  of  road  I  have  seen  only  one  tree, 
a  stunted  unfortunate  olive.    A  great  part  of  the  road  borden 
a  small  stream,  which  is  carried  into  Aleppo  for  the  supply 
of  the  town.     This  village  is  composed  of  about  a  hundred 
houses,  all  shaped  like  a  sugar-loaf.     The  one  I  occupy  is  a 
room  built  up  of  solid  mud  wall  to  the  height  of  about  eight 
feet,  the  superstructure  being  flnished  with  gun-dried  brida 
to  a  height  altogether  of  about  thirty  feet,  the  whole  building 
forming  a  cone  of  only  one  room  of  twenty-five  feet  in  dia- 
meter.    A  house  may  be  composed  of  two  or  three  of  these 
cones,  the  kitchen  of  course  having  a  hole  at  the  top  to  let 
out  the  smoke.    These  cones  are  neatly  built.  The  appearance 
of  the  place,  a  hundred  or  more  cones  heaped  together,  on 
approaching  it,  quite  took  me  by  surprise.    The  village  standi 
about  1500  feet  above  the  sea,  and  is  reached  by  a  gradual 
rise  of  about  400  feet  from  Aleppo.     Weather   fine,  not  at 
all  hot. 


SAMBOUR— LODGED  IN  A  STABLE.  329 

Samiour,  Sunday. — The  ride  from  Sadjour  to-day  took  us 

eight  and  a  half  honrs,  the  distance  being  about  thirty-three 

miles,  and  over  an  undulating  plain  the  whole  way,  nearly 

every  inch  of  it  cultivated,  and  a  great  part  of  it  under  wheat 

Not  a  tree  to  be  seen.     All  the  houses  in  this  village  have 

flat  roofs,  the  joists  and  rafters  being  brought  from  Aintab, 

about  eight  hours  distant,  where  wood  is  plentiful.     Here  a 

diicken  costs  four  piastres  (8d.),  and  eggs  from  2d.  to  4d.  a 

dozen.     We  have  passed  many  small  villages  to-day.     The 

men  seem  all  to  be  employed  as  muleteers  and  in  ploughing 

the  land  ;  all  other  work  is  done  by  the  women.     We  have 

passed  one  small  river  to-day,  the  Arade.      This  village  is 

1(00  feet  above  the  sea.     Weather  cool  and  pleasant.     I  am 

lodged  in  a  stable,  with  horses,  cows,  and  asses.     Christ  was 

bom  in  a  stable ;  why  should  I  grumble  at  being  lodged  in 

one?  but  I  am  quite  sure  the  stench  at  Bethlehem  never 

equalled  that  of  Sambour  last  night. 

24M,  Beridchick. — Six  hours'  ride  has  brought  us  to  this 
town,  on  the  northern  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  which  here  may 
be  two  to  three  hundred  yards  wide,  with  a  current  running 
at  the  rate  of  four  to  five  knots  an  hour.  Beridchick  must 
be  some  1100  feet  above  the  sea,  there  being  little  difference 
between  it  and  Aleppo. 

I  suppose  we  have  come  some  twenty-five  miles  to-day,  per- 
haps not  quite  so  much.     An  undulating  plain,  but  treeless 
tU  the  way,  and  all  either  cultivated  or  capable  of  cultiva- 
tion.    One  small  stream  we  have  passed  with  a  stone  bridge 
orer  it.     As  you  approach  Beridchick  from  the  north,  a  line 
of  hills  stretcl^  right  across  your  path.     The  Euphrates  runs 
at  the  foot  of  this  line  of  hills,  and  you  cross  it  to  reach  Ber- 
idchick, which  is  stuck  on  to  the  sides  of  these  hills,  built 
partly  of  stone  and  partly  of  mud.     I  am  in  a  room  at  the 
khan  here,  better  at  any  rate  than  the  stable  of  last  night. 
Thermometer  in  the  shade  67^     Whenever  you  ask  a  Turk 
how  many  inhabitants  his  village  contains,  he  merely  tells 
the  number  of  men ;  of  the  women  and  children  he  takes  no 
account.      Beridchick   is  well  supplied  with  water ;  a  fine 
stream    flows    down    the  hill   upon  the  side  of  which  the 
town  is  built;  then  it   has    the  Euphrates  running  at  its 
base.     The  place  might  be  made  a  paradise,  but  the  Turks 


330  TCHARMELIK^WELLS  EVERYWHERE'-ORFA: 

are  not  the  people  to  make  anything  of  it  but  what  it  is,  a 
jumble  of  stone  and  mud  hovels. 

26M,  Tuesday^  Tcharmelik. — Seven  hours'  ride  withoni 
good  mule-load  of  luggage  from  Beridchick.  On  leaTing 
Beridchick,  we  climbed  a  hill  400  to  500  feet  high,  and  hen 
at  Tcharmelik  we  are  about  1900  feet  above  the  sea^  or  about 
800  feet  above  the  Euphrates  at  Beridchick.  We  have  come 
over  more  undulating  ground,  a  chalky  loam,  and  the  road 
full  of  flints.  The  land  is  cultivable,  a  good  breadth  under 
wheat,  and  ploughing  going  on  for  maize.  Wells  everywhere 
along  the  road,  from  twenty-five  to  fifty  feet  deep  ;  not  a  tree 
to  be  seen,  with  the  exception  of  one  olive  and  a  few  fruit 
trees  at  Beridchick,  since  we  left  Aleppo.  This  is  a  cone-boilt 
village.  There  is  a  large  well-built  khan  here,  but  we  foimd 
it  so  dirty  that  I  preferred  being  lodged  in  a  hut  attached  to 
a  stable. 

21tkj  Or/a. — Arrived  here  after  a  nine  hours'  ride,  though 
I  don't  think  the  distance  I  have  come  from  Tcharmelik  is 
more  than  twenty-seven  miles.  The  road  in  great  partia 
hilly  and  rocky,  and  it  is  difficult  to  get  over  the  ground 
with  a  loaded  mule  at  a  faster  pace  than  four  miles  an 
hour.  There  is  cultivation,  however,  everywhere,  more  or 
less,  particularly  for  five  or  six  hours  after  leaving  Tcha^ 
melik,  where  the  land  is  not  encumbered  with  rock.  Wc 
have  seeu,  since  we  left  Aleppo,  thousands  of  flocks  of  goats 
and  sheep;  these  latter  are  often  parti-coloured,  generally 
black  and  white,  long  wool  with  large  tails,  and  not  mncb, 
if  any  larger,  than  our  Welsh  sheep.  The  horned  cattle  are 
the  most  miserable  breed  I  have  seen,  small,  black  stunted 
things,  with  very  short  horns.  Abraham,  they  say,  was  born 
in  Orfa.  If  so,  I  have  seen  many  of  his  descendants  tending 
their  flocks  in  this  neighbourhood.  The  town  containa  some 
35,000  to  40,000  inhabitants,  mostly  Mahometans.  There 
are  some  Christians,  of  five  different  sects,  they  tell  me,  all) 
as  is  usual  in  this  country,  at  daggers  drawn  with  each 
other.  There  is  a  very  old  mosque  here,  with  a  stream  of 
water  flowing  by  it,  which  forms  a  small  lake  close  to  the 
mosque,  and  in  it  there  are  thousands  of  holy  fish,  which 
nobody  ever  meddles  with,  except  to  feed.  They  are  some 
eighteen  inches  long,  the  largest  a  sort  of  carp,  and  are, 


ORFA—RAS  EL  A  IN— GOOD  CULTIVATION.    331 

they  saj,  from  Abraham's  own  stock.  A  castle  overlooks 
the  town,  a  complete  ruin.  Orfa  is  built  of  stone.  The 
houses  have  flat  roofs,  some  of  them  upon  wooden  joists, 
and  many  of  them  on  arches,  like  the  Jerusalem  houses.  In 
approaching  the  town  from  the  south,  the  road  cuts  in  two 
the  largest  and  most  thickly-populated  cemetery  I  remember 
to  have  seen,  with  two  upright  flat  stones  to  every  grave, 
somewhat  higher  and  narrower  than  in  our  own  churchyards, 
bat  in  the  same  style;  and  before  reaching  the  cemetery,  one 
meets  with  extensive  vineyards  on  either  hand.  The  streets 
are  very  narrow,  a  gutter  in  the  middle,  and  paved  on  each 
side  so  roughly  that  it  requires  great  care  not  to  fall  find 
break  a  limb.  The  town  is  partially,  if  not  wholly,  walled 
round,  and  stands  about  1700  feet  above  the  sea.  The 
highest  hill  I  came  over  is  about  2300  feet  above  the  sea. 
From  Aleppo  to  Orfa  the  only  fuel  the  inhabitants  have 
(with  the  exception  of  two  places)  is  dried  dung,  dried 
balbous  roots,  and  dried  maize-stalks,  not  a  bit  of  wood. 
Here,  however^  in  Orfa,  I  have  seen  some  good  flrewood 
brought  from  the  ravines  in  the  mountains.  In  all  the  dis- 
tance travelled  the  last  five  days,  I  have  not  seen  a  single 
enclosure,  not  a  single  attempt  at  a  hedge  or  a  wall,  unless 
in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Beridchick  or  Orfa,  nor  any 
attempt  to  grow  vegetables.  The  villages,  without  exception, 
are  a  jumble  of  mud  hovels,  without  an  inch  of  garden- 
ground  attached  to  any  of  them,  the  inhabitants  living  on 
rice,  milk,  cheese,  butter  and  bread,  and,  I  may  add,  chicken 
and  eggs,  for  there  is  poultry  everywhere,  and  eggs  are 
sometimes  to  be  had  fourteen  for  a  piastre,  or  twopence. 

28M,  Ras  el  Ain. — We  were  only  four  and  a  half  hours 
coming  here  from  Orfa,  so  that  the  distance  cannot  be  over 
eighteen  miles.  It  is  a  short  stage,  but  there  is  no  other 
place  within  reach  for  the  night  On  leaving  Orfa,  the  road 
runs  up  through  the  centre  of  a  beautiftil  valley,  where  I  saw 
more  cultivation  than  anywhere  else  since  I  left  Aleppo. 
Besides  wheat  and  barley,  there  is  a  sprinkling  of  vineyards, 
both  white  and  black ;  and  fine  grapes,  I  am  told,  can  be 
bought  here  in  the  season  at  a  penny  a  pound.  The  view  of 
Orfa  is  very  fine,  looking  back  upon  it  over  the  cultivated 
hedgeless  and  treeless  plain  or  valley,  situated  as  the  town 


332  THE  TAURUS— R AS  EL  AIN. 

is  on  a  terrace,  and  surrounded  on  three  sides  by  low  pic- 
turesque limestone  hills.  Good  water  is  everywhere  abun- 
dant, and  the  whole  plain  might  be  made  by  an  indostrioiiB 
and  intelligent  peasantry  into  a  perfect  paradise — in  appea> 
ance,  at  least.  On  our  left,  to  the  KW.,  there  is  a  high 
mountainous  ridge  in  the  distance,  the  Taurus,  covered  with 
snow  well  down  its  sides.  This  valley,  however,  is  not  quite 
treeless :  if  looked  for,  a  few  patches  of  poplar  and  mnlbeny 
trees,  leafless  now,  may  be  discovered.  Behind  the  little 
village,  which  does  not  contain  more  than  thirty  or  forty 
small  houses^  rises  an  artificial  mound  to  the  height  of  some 
thirty  or  forty  feet.  The  inhabitants  of  the  village  say  it 
marks  the  site  of  an  ancient  town.  There  have  been  no 
excavations  made  in  it,  but  the  children  scratch  about  some- 
times, and  not  long  since  found  a  piece  of  pottery,  a  vessel 
entire,  which  proved  to  be  so  hard,  they  had  difficolfy  in 
breaking  it !  I  had  a  charming  view  from  the  top  of  this 
mound  of  the  ground  under  cultivation,  very  rich  in  colou^ 
ing,  the  land  under  growing  crops  showing  every  variety  of 
green,  and  the  ploughed  land  every  variety  of  brown,  the 
two  intermixed,  and  the  effect  not  a  little  heightened  by  the 
shadows  thrown  over  the  whole  by  passing  clouds.  We  lie 
superbly  lodged  here  in  a  really  upper  story,  consisting  of 
one  room,  with  no  less  than  ten  windows  in  it,  all  guiltless 
of  glass,  and  the  smoke  from  the  fire,  over  which  we  sie 
now  cooking  our  dinner,  a  sort  of  castiela  (a  South  Americsn 
stew ;  but  alas  I  it  wants  the  vegetables),  may  choose  which 
window  to  go  out  at.  The  men  in  all  these  villages  sie 
strong-looking,  well-built  fellows,  and  the  women  Insty 
wenches,  and  not  bad  looking,  but  no  refinement  of  featoie 
in  their  faces.  How  can  there  be  refinement  when  they  do 
all  the  hard  work,  and  are  constantly  exposed  to  the  siction 
of  the  sun  and  weather  ?  The  children  are  generally  very 
pretty — splendid  eyes,  dark  complexions  of  course,  but  all 
with  more  or  less  colour  in  their  cheeks.  Murillo  beauties 
among  them  by  hundreds.  They  appear  to  be  a  most  docile 
people.  By  turns  the  whole  male  population  of  the  village 
have  come  to  our  upper  story  to  have  a  look  at  me  aa  I 
write  this  diary.  My  servant  has  just  brought  in  five  eggs 
to  put  into  the  stew,  for  which  he   has  paid   one  penny. 


GERMAN  DOCTOR  AT  ORFA— ALEPPO  BUTTON.  333 

flTiikt  at  the  house  of  the  French  Vice-consul  at  Orfa,  whom 
I  had  met  at  Aleppo,  and  who  had  kindly  given  me  a  letter 
to  his  dragoman 9  a  German  doctor  called  upon  me.  In  the 
centre  of  his  left  cheek  was  a  hideous-looking  scabby  sore, 
foil  two  inches  in  circumference,  with  considerable  inflamma- 
tion around  it;  his  hands  were  wrapped  in  handkerchiefs. 
He  was  8u£fering  from  the  Aleppo  button,  a  complaint  not 
dangerous  to  life,  but  disgusting  in  appearance,  and  said  to 
attack  sooner  or  later  every  one  who  has  ever  visited  Aleppo. 
It  takes  a  year  to  run  its  course,  and  is  attributed  to  the  water. 
1  thought  the  doctor  a  very  bold  man  to  present  himself  to 
a  stranger  in  such  a  condition.  To-day,  too,  I  have  seen  a 
boy  suffering  in  the  same  way  in  this  village.  The  women 
hereabouts  wear  a  peculiar  headdress.  The  whole  head  is 
covered  with  a  kerchief,  so  that  you  can't  see  how  the  affair 
is  managed;  the  hair,  however,  whatever  there  may  be  of 
it,  is  brought  forward  over  the  top  of  the  head,  and  by  a 
pillow  (I  should  say)  is  raised  some  eight  or  ten  inches 
above  the  forehead,  in  the  shape  of  a  nautilus  shell.  I  see 
many  pretty  little  girls  with  rings  in  their  noses,  and  really 
they  don't  look  out  of  place  there.  Height  above  the  sea 
about  2200  feet.     Thermometer  in  the  shade  66°  at  noon. 

29tA,  Michmichin. — The  height  of  this  village  is  about  1900 
feet  above  the  sea.  At  3  p.m.  the  thermometer  in  the  shade 
stands  at  70^  We  have  been  eight  hours  in  coming  here  from 
Bas  el  Ain.  The  road  is  very  rocky  in  some  parts,  and  rough 
and  heavy  in  others,  rain  having  fallen  here  yesterday.  The 
distance  cannot  be  more  than  twenty-four  miles.  We  have 
had  no  rain  on  the  road  since  we  left  Aleppo.  We  have 
passed  over  a  considerable  extent  of  good  land  to-day,  and 
have  come  close  by  one  large  village.  There  are  a  few  trees, 
too,  in  a  water  ravine,  but  none  scattered  about  This  village 
is  built  on  a  hill,  with  a  good  stream  of  water  running  at 
the  foot  of  it,  and  may  contain  twenty-five  houses,  built  of 
stones  without  mortar,  having  flat  roofs,  and  plastered  with 
mud  inside.  These  people  don't  seem  to  have  much  notion 
of  ornamentation ;  the  walls  of  the  room  we  are  lodged  in, 
adjoining  the  stable,  are  covered  with  rudely  pictured  hands 
all  over,  very  badly  made,  a  repetition  of  what  I  saw  in  a 
room  occupied  by  us  a  day  or  two  ago.     This  is  a  very  silent 


334  MICHMICHIN-^A  SILENT  VILLAGE, 

village.  Half-a-dozen  men  come  into  oar  room,  squat  down 
for  an  hour  or  more,  and  then  move  away  without  hiTing 
spoken  a  word.  The  population  may  not  be  over  a  hundred 
souls.  The  sheikh  or  chief  says  the  Government  have  letied 
such  heavy  taxes  upon  the  people  that  many  of  them  baTC 
gone  to  other  and  more  out-of-the-way  villages,  where  thcf 
are  not  so  easily  got  at. 

30^^,  Sauverik. — It  has  taken  us  only  five  and  a  half  honn 
to  come  to  this  village,  but  the  road  is  good,  over  a  fine  plain 
the  greater  part  of  the  way,  and  we  have  travelled  quicklj, 
so  the  distance  may  be  twenty-three  miles.     This  is  a  large 
village :  it   has   an   extensive   bazaar.     A   large   and  bigk 
mound  stands  on  the  south  side  of  it,  once  the  site  of  an  ex- 
tensive fortification,  now  a  complete  ruin.       The  population 
is  principally  Mahometan,  but  there  is  a  good  sprinkling  of 
Christians,  and  many  Armenians.     I  am  located  in  a  room  in 
a  khan.     Soon  after  I  arrived,  I  went  out  to  take  a  look  at 
the  village,  and  I  was  literally  mobbed  by  old  and  young. 
In  a  walk  through  the   bazaar  and   round  the  ruined  for- 
tress, I  was  accompanied  by  a  hundred  people.     My  servant  is 
but  a  poor  cook,  so  that  in  preparing  our  meals  I  am  obliged 
to  officiate.       The  routine  of  the  day's  work  is  this :  I  am 
generally  in  the  saddle  by  4  a.m.,   after  having  taken  a 
cup  of  tea  or  coffee.      As  I  move  along,  I  eat  a  hard  ^  or 
two,  and  on  our  arrival  at  our  resting-place,  which  we  usually 
reach  by  noon,  I  get  another  cup  of  tea,  and  then  we  tun 
our  attention  to  preparing  supper.      If  we  are  located  in  a 
village  where  there  is  no  bazaar,  we  buy  a  fowl  (the  fowb 
here  are  all  in  good  condition,  for  they  live  in  the  midst  of 
grain),  which  costs  8d.  ;  half-a-dozen  eggs.  Id.    (we  bavc 
bought  a  dozen  to-day  for  2d.);  and  a  halfpenny- wortli  of 
milk.     If  there  is  a  bazaar  in   the  village,  we  buy  mutton 
in  place  of  chicken ;  we  have  brought  rice  with  us.    Our 
meal  to-day,  which  we  have  just  finished,  costs  4d.  for  mut- 
ton. Id,  for  eggs,  ^d.  for  rice.     These  articles,  artistically 
managed,  assisted  with  the  requisite  quantity  of  pepper  and 
salt,  have  made  a  good  and  sufficient  supper  for  myself,  mj 
servant,  and  the  muleteer,  and  a  good  remainder  was  left 
for  distribution  between  a  sick  man  next  door  and  three  (X 
four  hungry  beggars,  who  are  never  absent  when  eating  ii 


SOUVERIK— TURKISH  KHAN—KARABACHCHA.  335 

{oing  on.  The  supper  costs  for  us  all — I  might  say,  for  six 
people — sixpence.  The  fuel  for  the  fire,  by-the-by,  cost  one 
penny,  which  must  be  added  to  the  cost  of  the  supper — 
make  it  sevenpence.  I  am  told  that  eggs  may  sometimes  be 
bought  thirty  for  a  piastre,  or  about  twopence.  Vegetables  are 
entirely  wanting.  I  have  seen  no  village  yet  with  even  the 
ghost  of  a  garden  attached  to  it.  We  have  had  rain  to-day 
for  the  first  time  since  we  left  Aleppo.  Height  of  this  large 
Tillage  above  the  sea  2400  feet;  thermometer  in  tftiis  room 
(MT.  Turkish  khans  usually  form  a  quadrangle,  the  rooms 
nmning  round  all  four  sides — underneath  for  cattle  and  cargo, 
and  up-stairs  for  travellers,  leaving  a  large  space  for  load- 
bg  and  unloading  the  beasts  of  burden  in  the  centre  of 
the  ground-floor.  The  rooms  up»stairs  enter  into  a  broad 
ecffridor.  The  one  I  am  now  in  is  built  of  stone  with  a 
flat  roof.  The  rooms  for  travellers,  all  of  them,  are  merely 
four  bare  rough  walls,  with  a  door  .and  an  opening,  closed 
by  wooden  shutters,  to  let  in  light ;  a  mud  floor,  very 
uneven,  and  always  with  a  few  inches  of  dust  and  dirt  upon 
it.  They  are  execrable  places  these  khans;  but  one  gets 
used  to  them. 

iXtty  Karaiachcha  {Black  Garden). — We  have  been  ten 
honrs  getting  here  from  Souverik,  The  distance  cannot  be 
x&ore  than  twenty-five  miles,  but  the  road  in  great  part  is 
Very  bad — rocky,  and  now  muddy.  Yesterday  we  had  a 
little  rain,  but  to-day  a  tempest  has  been  raging  ever  since 
We  left  Souverik,  and  mountain  torrents  have  come  down 
and  made  little  insignificant  streams  almost  impassable.  In 
crossing  the  last  stream,  before  reaching  Karabachcha,  the 
nmleteer  and  myself  had  to  leave  my  servant  on  the  wrong 
side.  He  could  not  get  his  mule  across,  and  when  a  horse 
arrived  which  we  sent  to  him  from  the  village,  the  ford  by 
irhich  we  had  crossed  had  become  impassable,  but  he  ulti- 
QMitely  got  across  a  mile  or  two  lower  down  stream,  and 
reached  the  village  some  two  hours  after  us,  pretty  well 
knocked  up.  The  wind  blew  a  gale,  bitingly  cold,  coming 
from  the  snow-clad  hills ;  and  as  there  was  no  shelter  for 
lim  where  he  was,  I  really  believe  he  would  have  died  had 
le  remained  there  during  the  night ;  so  that  I  was  very  glad 
ndeed  when  he  came  into  the  Khurdish  stone  hut,  where  I  was 


336        KHURDISH  VILLAGE^KOOSHDOGHAN. 

drying  myself  at  the  fire.  A  basin  of  hot  tea  soon  ibade  ns 
forget  what  we  had  gone  through,  and  later  on,  after  a  supper 
of  stewed  chicken,  we  laid  ourselves  down,  and  though  the 
hut  leaked  a  good  deal,  we  passed,  on  the  ground,  a  tolerably 
comfortable  night.  We  are  here  among  the  Ehurds,  and 
though  they  have  a  bad  name,  they  have  treated  ns  very 
hospitably.     Height  of  the  village  some  3600  feet. 

April  \%t^  Kooshdoghan. — We  reached  this  village  at  3  p.m., 
having  b^en  more  than  eight  hours  coming  from  Earabachcha, 
a  distance  of  not  more  than  a  dozen  miles,  pretty  nearly  the 
whole  time  consumed   in  ascending   a   mountain,    Earadja 
Dagh,  on  one  side  to  the  height  of  5000  feet,  and  descending 
it  on  the  other  2600  feet.     The  road  is  by  far  the  worst  we 
have  yet  passed,  rocky  from  beginning  to  end,   and  now 
muddy  as  well,  for  it  has  been  raining  all  day.     On  arriving 
at  Eooshdoghan,  we  asked  for  wood  to  make  a  fire — there  was 
none ;  for  a  chicken  to  make  a  stew — there  was  none  to  be 
had ;  eggs  there  might  be,  and  in  the  morning  there  would 
be  milk.     All  this  I  thought  augured  badly.     We  had  had 
a  scanty  breakfast  very  early,  and  the  prospect  of  getting 
nothing  more  to  eat  until  the  next  morning  was  not  pleas- 
ant, so  we  tried  what  coaxing  would  do.     AH  women  like  to 
be  coaxed,  and  the  Ehurdish  women  are  not  an  exception. 
The  two  we  had  to  deal  with  were  particularly  good-looking, 
so  we  attacked  them  on  that  point.     The  aspect  of  thingd 
soon  began  to  change  in  our  favour ;  there  was  a  log  of  wood, 
if  we  could  only  cut  it  up ;  a  neighbour  might  perhaps  find 
us  a  chicken ;  a  goat  could  be  milked,  if  we  liked,  and  there 
was  some  leban  (sour  milk)  we  could  have ;  so  that  in  place 
of  passing  a  comfortless  and  hungry  evening,  we  were  made 
at  last  more  comfortable  than  we  had  been  at  any  other  vil- 
lage resting-place  on  all  our  route.     There  was  one  thiog, 
however,  we  could  not  get,  neither  candle  nor  oil  to  light  up 
our  room.     Our  own  candles  had  been  spoiled  or  lost  in  the 
previous  day's  storm,  so  we  kept  the  log  of  wood  burning, 
and  it  gave  us  both  light  and  heat,  which  answered  our  par- 
pose  very  well. 

4^A,  Diarbekir, — From  Kooshdoghan. — The  time  allowed  in 
ordinary  weather  for  reaching  this  place  is  four  hours.  We 
were  five  hours  in  getting  here,  for  our  horses  were  tired,  and 


DIARBEKIR—THE  TIGRIS.  337 

the  road  was  in  a  wretched  state.     We  arrived  here  at  10 
A.1L  on  the  2d.  I  have  been  here  now  twcf  days,  in  a  room  given 
to  me  by  Mr  Boyaghaen,  in  a  large  house  adjoining  his  own 
dwelling,  in  which  he  had  a  school  of  ninety  boys,  princi- 
paJly,  if  not  all,  Armenians  and  Protestants.    Mr  Boyaghaen 
is  a  native  of  this  country,  married  to  an  English  lady, 
daughter  of  an  officer  of  the  Indian  army.     Mr  B.  married 
this  lady  in  England  three  years  ago,  and  since  then  she  has 
continQed  to  reside  in  Diarbekir.     What  a  place,  one  would 
think,  for  a  young  English  lady  to  live  in,  accustomed  to  all 
the  comforts  of  an  English  home,  and  to  the  society  of  her 
friends  there  I    Nevertheless  she  was  leading  a  happy  life,  and 
from  her  and  from  her  husband  I  experienced  great  kindness. 
The  road  between  this  and  Kooshdoghan  for-  three  hours  is 
oTer  a  dead  plain,  and  then  it  descends  into  a  valley,  where 
a  stream  is  crossed  by  one  of  the  few  entire  bridges  to  be 
met;  an  ascent  thence  to  a  tableland,  and  a  ride  of  an  hour 
and  a  half,  brings  one  to  the  walls  of  Diarbekir ;  and  a  for* 
midable  place  it  looks,  and  was,  no  doubt,  in  former  days, 
with  its  well-built  stone  walls  some  forty  feet  high,  and  its 
enormous  bastions  all  around  at  intervals  of  some  fifty  yards. 
The  extent  of  the  wall  is  about  three  miles.     On  one  side  it 
ifi  baOt  on  precipitous  solid  rock.    The  old  castle  inside  the 
walls,  built  on  a  mound,  is  in  ruins.    The  Tigris  winds  its 
way  through  the  valley  close  to  the  town,  but  250  feet  below 
it    It  is  much  swollen  at  present  by  the  heavy  rains  that 
have  lately  fallen,  and  is  very  muddy ;  opposite  to  the  nearest 
part  of  the  city  wall  it  may  be  100  yards  wide,  but  a  little 
higher  up  it  is  narrower,  and  has  a  bridge.     The  population 
of  this  place  is  variously  stated  as  being  between  25,000 
and  50,000    souls,   notwithstanding    a    census  taken  last 
year  made  it  only  22,000.     It  is  said,  however,  that  no  reli- 
ance can  be  placed  upon  the  correctness  of  this  census,  and 
I  can  easily  believe  it.    There  is  no  direct  trade  with  Europe 
from  this  Diarbekir,  and  I  have  found  it  impossible  to  turn 
into  money  even  a  £10  circular  note   of    Coutts    &    Co. 
Honey  is  worth  here  from  12  to  25  per  cent     Of  course  there 
is  not  the  ghost  of  a  bank  or  a  newspaper  here.    The  streets 
are  narrow  and  the  sides  roughly  paved  with  large  stones, 
and  the  everlasting  gutter  full  of  filth  in  the  centre.    They 


338  DIARBEKIR— RUSSIAN  CONSUL. 

are  from  six  to  a  dozen  feet  wide.     The  streets  of  all  ibe 
towns  tliat  I  have  passed  through  since  I  landed  at  IskiA- 
derun  present  a  line  of  blank  wall  on  either  side,  for  the 
houses  are  built  in  quadrangles,   with  a  courtyard  in  tin 
centre,  around  which  are  the  rooms,  with  the  windows  look- 
ing into  it.     The  houses  have  all  flat  roofs,  forming  the  naoil 
promenade,  and  the  sleeping-place  during  the  hot  weatber; 
for  every  time  one  goes  into  the  street,  one  runs  the  risk  of 
falling  and  breaking  a  limb.      The  Russian  Consul  firam 
Aleppo  is  here  just  now.     Yesterday  he  came  to  visit  lb 
Boyagbaen,  and  he  was  followed  through  the  streets,  and  efoi 
into  the  courtyard,  by  tag-rag  and  bobtail,  all  with  thdr 
mouths  open,  staring  after  him  as  if  he  had  been  a  wild  beiit 
He  is  visiting  this  district,  and  is  looking  about  to  detenoini 
where  it  may  be  politic  to  establish  vice-consulates,  althongli 
there  is  not  a  single  Russian  subject  hereabouts,  and  in 
Aleppo  they  tell  me  there  are  but  three  Russians.    Eveiy- 
thing  in  this  part  of  the  Turkish  empire  is  tumbUng  to  pieoai, 
bridges  broken  down  and  walls  out  of  repair  between  this  SDd 
Aleppo  to  such  an  extent  that  a  few  showers  of  rain  at  S17 
time  are  sufficient  to  stop  all  traffic.    The  Turk  neither  bniUi 
nor  repairs.     All  is  dirt  and  misery  throughout  the  wbok 
route  between  this  and  Aleppo,  an  extent  of  country  0001- 
posed  of  plains  and  valleys  for  the  most  part  practicable  fif 
the  growth  of  grain ;  nothing  to  do  but  to  plough  and  soW) 
no  trees  to  clear  away  before  commencing  operations.    li 
fact,  in  the  whole  route  that  I  have  come  over,  with  the  a- 
ception  of  a  few  patches  of  willows,  some  mulberry  and  sone 
fruit  trees,  in  the  vicinity  of  Beridchick,  and  some  stunted 
trees,  few  and  far  between,  on  the  Karabachcha  monntuB, 
there  is  not  a  tree  or  a  shrub  anywhere.    It  is  a  grain  coontrj 
throughout,  ready  prepared  by  nature,  and  all  that  is  wintei 
is  a  government  to  foster  industry  to  make  it  productive. 
As  it  is,  you  can  procure  wheaten  cakes  very  cheap  all  alosg 
the  road ;  fowls,  always  fat,  for  they  live  among  the  gisinj 
for  6d.   apiece ;  eggs  frequently  for   Id.    a  dozen,  but  nov 
from  2d.  to  3d.  a  dozen ;  and  milk  almost  for  nothing.   Ai 
I  have  mentioned  already,   every  evening   at    our  restb^- 
place  we  cooked  a  stew  composed  of  chicken,  eggs,  rice,  and 
milk,  sufficient  to  feed  half-a-dozen  hungry  peoplei  for  aboal 


KELLIKS^FOPULATION.  339 

8d. ;  and  of  coarse,  I,  as  a  foreigner,  was  always  fleeced  to 
fiome  extent  in  prices.  Everywhere  that  I  passed,  prettj  nearly 
one-half  of  every  town  and  village  was  in  ruins.  A  hungry 
Government  squeezes  the  people,  and  is  itself  bankrupt ;  and  it 
may  be  truly  said  that  the  people  are  slaves  and  the  officials 
rogues.  The  whole  fabric  must,  one  would  think,  soon  crumble 
to  dost,  and,  perhaps  under  the  Bnssians,  take  another  form. 
This  place  is  very  much  out  of  the  world.  The  post  from 
Constantinople  is  now  overdue  three  or  four  days,  and  we  are 
in  the  dark  as  to  what  is  passing  in  Europe,  for  the  electric 
telegraph  is  made  but  little  use  of  here.  Even  we  cannot 
obtain  any  particulars  of  a  bad  shock  of  earthquake  which  we 
learn  took  place  at  Aleppo  a  few  days  ago.  And  this  Diar- 
bekir  should  be  a  place  of  some  consequence,  seeing  that  it 
contains  from  25,000  to  50,000  souls. 

6^. — Just  now  there  is  a  dearth  of  kelliks,  and  I  have 
been  detained  here  in  consequence,  unable  to  proceed  to 
HosoL  Yesterday,  however,  some  returned  skins  arrived, 
and  we  at  once  contracted  for  a  kellik^  Mr  J.  and  myself,  to 
take  us  to  Mosul  for  £12,  and  to  be  ready  to  start  on  Mon- 
day the  8th.  It  has  been  raining  here  for  the  last  eight  days, 
60  we  may  hope,  after  so  long  a  spell  of  bad  weather,  to  have 
a  dry  float  on  the  Tigris  down  to  Mosul. 

Yesterday,  iu  the  train  of  Monsieur  Ivanhow,  the  Russian 
Consul  at  Aleppo,  I  visited  a  ruin  of  what  might  once  have 
been  a  church,  and  also  a  church,  now  an  armoury,  filled 
with  what  we  should  call  condemned  military  stores — flint- 
lock muskets,  and  some  percussion  muskets  in  such  a 
wretched  rusty  state  as  to  be  of  even  less  use  than  the  flint- 
lock muskets,  which  were  of  Yankee  manufacture ;  cartridge- 
boxes,  old  greatcoats,  horse-trappings,  and  various  other 
militflffy  equipments — all,  I  should  say,  useless  in  the  present 
day ;  indeed,  so  old  looking,  that,  for  aught  I  know  to  the 
contrary,  they  might  be  of  the  same  age  as  the  church, 
which  is  said  to  be  1600  years  old.  What  with  gun-racks 
and  other  Turkish  arrangements,  as  well  as  thorough  white- 
washing of  the  interior  walls,  pretty  nearly  all  traces  of 
paintings  and  inscriptions,  with  which  I  am  told  the  walls 
were  once  covered,  hav^  now  disappeared.  From  this  old 
church  we  went  to  the  principal  mosque  of  Diarbekir,  with 


340  MOSQUE  AT  DIARBEKIR— ALEPPO  BUTTON. 

its  square  miDaret,  a  peculiarity  which  shows  the  chnrclito 
have   been   built   for   Christian   worship.      There  is  Bome 
elaborate  Saracenic  ornamentation  around  the  spacious  court} 
from  which  entrance  to  the  mosque  is  obtained,  and  maof 
handsome  marble  pillars.     The  mosque  itself  may  be  siid 
to  be  without  ornament  of  any  sort  inside.     The  Bossiui 
Consul,  who  led  the  procession  (if  I  may  so  call  it),  in  com- 
pany with  a  Turkish  colonel,  so  far  forgot  himself  as  to 
enter  the  mosque  without  taking  off  his  muddy  jackboots, 
and  by  this  piece  of  sacrilege,  so  considered  by  the  MahoD^ 
tans,  he  deeply  wounded  their  feelings,  and  the  circumBtance 
caused  no  small  excitement  in  the  city;  for  the  Mahometm 
prejudices   are   opposed  to  any  person   entering  a  moBqoe 
unless  barefooted  or  with  slippers,  which  Europeans  usoaDj 
carry  with  them  on  such  occasions.    The  Bussian  Consol  Im 
been  all  things  to  all  men  during  his  visit  here,  but  I  doolit 
much  if  this  last  act  of  his  has  not  more  than  nentnJiied 
the  golden  opinions  he  had  won  from  all  classes  by  hit 
extreme  affability  and  courteousness. 

I  have  just  seen  a  child,  eighteen  months  old,  a  niece  of 
Mr  Boyaghaen's,  suffering  (if  there  be  any  suffering  attacbei 
to  it,  which  they  say  there  is  not)  from  the  Aleppo  button. 
The  child,  a  fine  rosy-cheeked  little  girl,  had  seven  of  these 
disgusting-looking  boils  upon  different  parts  of  the  face,  i& 
all  stages;  some,  of  recent  date,  had  assumed  the  appeannoe 
of  dry  scabby  sores  getting  better.    These  buttons,  it  aeemii 
take  a  year  to  run  their  course,  often — ^generally,  I  shonU 
say — cleaving  a  scar  behind  them,  more  or  less  in  appearaneo 
like  an  aggravated  vaccination-mark.     All  children,  without 
exception,  when  in  their  first  to  their  third  year  of  life,  m 
attacked  by  the  Aleppo  button ;  and  even  foreigners,  it  ii 
said,  who  pay  but  a  short  visit  to  this  country,  are  sooner  or 
later  attacked  by  it,  but  not  to  the  loathsome  extent  to  which 
it  reaches  with  children  born  here.     By  some  it  is  attributed 
to  the  water,  and  by  others  to  a  want  of  iodine  in  the  salt  of 
the  country;  but  neither  of  these  theories  is  satisfactory,  sioeo 
it  is  general  all  through  the  country  from  Aleppo  to  Bif- 
dad.    No  person  has  ever  been  known  to  have  a  seomd 
attack  of  the  button. 


■Ill" 


CHAPTER  XV. 

LeaTe  Ditrbekir  in  a  ifceBil;— Dewnription  of— ProviuoiiB  in  plenty  on  the  TigriB — 
Dacki,  ploTer,  ^^eons,  hawks,  stork,  bliMskbird,  nightingale— High  limestone 
ehflEs — Ketpids— -Seanty  of  scenery— Stone  tombs  turned  into  villages— Rapids 
not  so  harmless — Jezireh  Ibu  Omar — ^Bacaar  for  porohaae  of  goat's  hair — Two 
Boman  bridges — The  ridge  on  which  the  ark  rested — Monntfons  with  snow — 
Arab  raids — ^Deserted  Tillages — ^Women  tattooed— JTeZ^iib  nearly  wrecked — 
Mosul — The  Consul,  Mr  Rassam,  takes  us  in — Handsome  house— He  is  translating 
the  Hebrew  Bible  into  Arabic— Arrange  for  another  kdltk—Mx  Layard's  labours 
«t  Nineveh — Sculptures  remaining— ?Pasha  buys  his  appointment— Duties- 
Rain — Distant  mountains  covered  with  snow — ^The  Pasha  and  head  of  customs 
only  thrive — Thunderstorm — Oieaking  wheels  drawing  water — Ldands  in  the 
river— Birds— Birthplace  of  Saladin— Bricks  with  Gufio  character- Circular 
boats — ^Woman  swims  off  to  supply  butter,  &c.— River  very  muddy — Origin  of 
date-trees  here— Bagdad— The  knan  very  dirty,  cook-shops  filthy— Our  Consul 
lodges  us — Nebuchadnezzar  and  the  golden  calf — Babylon — Gale  of  dust — Net- 
woric  of  ancient  canals— Railways  wanted — Babel— Rich  and  Layurd — Skeletons 
—lion  cut  out  of  limestone — ^A  saint's  tomb— Roastingly  hot— Funeral— Birs 
Nimroudy  its  destruction — Tomb  of  Prophet  Ezekiel— The  Easr  of  Rich— The 
ancient  tree  Athel6— Bagdad — Ruins  of  Akarkouff,  has  no  history — Sand-storm 
The  Aleppo  button  called  the  date-mark — Vaccination  for. 

9^  April  J  an  hard  the  kellik. — Yesterday  at  10.30  we 
left  Diarbekir  for  Mosul.  Oar  kellik  is  a  raft  composed  of 
150  inflated  goat-skins  as  a  foundation,  all  tied  together  and 
fastened  to  a  framework  of  poles,  forming  a  platform  about 
25  feet  by  14.  On  this  platform  are  placed  two  tiers  of 
poles,  very  wide  apart,  and  upon  these  poles  a  layer  of 
rods  which  might  be  said  to  form  the  deck,  and  which  floats 
about  18  inches  above  the  surface  of  the  river  as  we  move 
along.  All  this  woodwork  is  laid  on  in  the  roughest  way 
possible,  and  in  walking  about,  great  care  is  necessary  not 
to  put  your  foot  through  it  upon  the  skins.  It  is  not 
fastened  together.  Well,  on  the  top  of  all  this  our  tent- 
house  or  cabin  is  placed.  It  was  built  on  the  beach,  and 
lifted  into  its  place  on  the  kellik.  It  is  made  of  a  very 
slight  framework  of  poles  and  rods,  with  a  roof,  and  covered 
over  with  thick  felt  sides  and  top,  and  the  latter  has  besides 
a  waterproof  covering.  The  cabin  covers  a  space  on  the 
deck  of  the  kellik  of  11  feet  by  7,  and  has  a  boarded 


342  KELLIK-^DESCRIPTION  OF. 

floor.      It  cost  constructing,   300  piastres,  or  about  SOs. 
There  is  a  felt  partition  in  the  centre,  one-half  of  the  Msk 
being    occupied   by    Mr    J.    and    myself,    and    the  other 
half  by  our  three  servants.     Our  crew  consists  of  the  captain 
and  one  man,  both  Khurds.     The  captain  would  do  very  well 
to   personate  Neptune,  and  the   crew  is   a  very  powerfol 
fine  young  fellow.     A  pair  of  the  rudest  oars  possible  are 
kept  at  work  pretty  constantly,  in  order  to  keep  the  kMi 
from  running  aground,  or  upon  the  projecting  points  ex- 
tending into  the  river,  rather  than  for  any  use  they  are  in 
accelerating  our  speed.    They  are  willow  poles  about  eighteen 
feet  long,  with  an  average  thickness  of  about  four  inchec 
The  wash  is  about  three  feet  long,  made  of  thin  strips  of 
willow,  a  foot  long  and  an  inch  broad,  fastened  togetlier, 
and  to  the  pole,  with  goat-hide  line.      A  couple  of  thdei, 
and  a  couple  of  arched  rods  to  raise  the  oars  a  foot  aborv 
the  gunwale  of  the  kellik^  and  make  them  workable,  cm* 
plete  the  arrangement     The  oars  are  worked  by  one  maoi 
as  a  pair  of  sculls  might  be.     The  occupation  of  the  cqptain 
and  crew  consists   in  working   the  sculls,  and  constantlj 
pouring  water  on  the  skins  to  keep  them  from  cracking. 

We  have  had  a  head  wind  for  the  most  part  ever  since 
we  left  Diarbekir,  though  occasionally,  &om  the  t¥rist8  vA 
turns  in  the  river,  it  has  been  right  aft.  Last  evening  f« 
pulled  up  very  early,  and  made  fast  to  the  shore  oppoeite 
a  village,  where  we  bought  eggs  at  2d.  a  dozen,  vA 
were  offered  fat  chickens  at  6d.  apiece,  and  spring  chickem 
at  4d.  The  banks  of  the  river  seem  to  be  fine  loam,  and 
are  partially  cultivated.  The  crops  are  wheat  and  barley 
and  look  very  promising.  Flocks  of  sheep  and  goats  in  great 
plenty,  and  the  shepherd's  pipe  is  constantly  heard,  and  is 
often  musical.  It  is  now  nearly  0  p.m.,  and  the  weather  if 
inclined  to  be  wet;  the  wind  round  to  the  south,  more  aft; 
and  whenever  there  is  a  squall,  the  kelUk  becomes  un- 
manageable, and  she  spins  round  and  round,  frequently 
taking  the  ground  close  to  the  banks,  and  now  and  again 
bursting  a  skin  in  the  operation.  When  a  skin  bursts,  it  is 
blown  up  by  means  of  a  long  reed,  and  the  fracture  tied  Qp> 
This  must  be  a  common  occurrence,  for  our  raftsmen  don't 
seem  to  think  much  about  it.     Our  sportsmen  keep  popping 


■■— ^ 


PIGEONS-'HA  WKS^STORKS,  343 

at  dncks  and  plover,  bat  so  far  we  have  had  but  two  birds, 
although  birds  are  very  plentiful.  Villages  close  to  the  river 
are  only  met  with  occasionally,  bat  when  we  do  see  one, 
there  is  sore  to  be  a  large  pigeon-honse — ^the  most  promi- 
nent bnilding — ^for  the  accommodation  of  wild  pigeons,  which 
flock  to  these  houses  in  great  numbers,  for  the  want,  I 
Bappose,  of  trees  to  resort  to  for  building  their  nests ;  the 
coontry  so  far  is  very  bare  of  trees.  This  accommodation  is 
rendered  to  the  pigeons,  which  are  never  molested,  for  the  sake 
of  their  droppings,  used  for  growing  water-melons,  an  article 
of  general  culture  in  this  country.  In  Diarbekir,  wherever 
there  is  a  tree  in  the  town,  it  is  frequented  by  hawks,  which 
arrive  there  early  in  spring,  build  their  nests,  and  when  the 
hot  weather  has  fairly  set  in,  they  leave  with  their  young  for 
a  more  temperate  climate.  They  are  said  to  be  useful  in 
destroying  scorpions  and  other  noxious  insects  abounding  in 
Diarbekir.  The  stork,  too,  comes  in  early  spring,  builds  and 
hatches  its  young  on  the  tops  of  minarets,  and  leaves  again 
in  September. 

Wth. — ^Yesterday  was  wet ;  we  were  under  way,  however, 
at  4  A.M.,  and  as  there  was  little  or  no  wind  all  day,  we 
made  a  capital  run,  not  stopping  until  we  made  fast  to 
the  bank  for  the  night  at  about  7  p.m.,  but  not  opposite 
in  a  village,  as  was  our  usual  practice.  So,  after  leaving 
this  morning,  we  have  pulled  up  again  for  half  an  hour 
at  a  village  to  purchase  provisions ;  two  chickens,  a  dozen 
of  eggs,  and  any  quantity  of  lehan  and  sweet  milk,  have 
cost  Is.  lOd. 

The  first  sound  I  heard  this  morning  was  the  rolling  note 
of  the  blackbird,  and  now,  as  I  write,  a  nightingale  is  singing 
at  the  top  of  her  voice,  though  it  is  seven  o'clock,  and  a  bright 
and  beautiful  day.  Yesterday  our  whole  run  was  literally 
through  a  succession  of  perpendicular  limestone  cliffs,  of  the 
height  frequently  of  500  feet,  which  come  close  to  the  river 
— their  base,  in  fact,  washed  by  it — with  a  ridge  of  hills,  or 
rather  a  mountainous  ridge,  forming  the  background  of  the 
picture,  not  at  any  great  distance  from  us,  running  up,  I 
should  say,  in  places  to  the  height  of  3000  feet,  principally 
ou  the  left  bank  of  the  river.  During  the  day  we  must  have 
gone  over  sixty  miles  of  ground^  or  rather  more ;  for  at 


344  RIVER  SCENERY^RAPIDS— RUINS. 

times,  over  the  rapids,  we  must  have  been  going  along  li 
the  rate  of  seven  or  eight  miles  an  hour,  onr  head  going  lU 
ronnd  the  compass,  sometimes  pointing  due  north  and  some- 
times due  south — such  are  the  twists  and  turns  of  this  tlvsl 
The  contortions  of  the  river  added  greatly  to  the  beauty  and 
variety  of  the  scenery.     The  limestone  hills  took  every  imir 
ginable  shape  as  we  swept  along  with  the  current,  and  a  gieit 
variety  of  colouring.     Their  height,  though  never  so  high  ai 
the  Gapitan  in  the  Yosemite  valley  (California),  was,  Ibeliefe, 
more  than  I  have*  stated,  and  in  many  instances  they  vere 
quite  perpendicular,  and  often  put  me  in  mind  of  that  hnge 
bare  lump  of  rock  ;  but  here  we  had  a  stretch  of  fifty  mQci 
or  more  of  this  magnificent  scenery,  whilst  in  the  Yosemite 
valley  it  is  limited  to  a  very  few  miles.     I  could  not  but  think, 
as  we  floated  along  yesterday  with  this  long  continuous  line  of 
hilly  and  mountainous  scenery  on  either  side  of  us,  that  if  the 
Yankees  were  masters  here,  what  a  picture  they  would  draw  of 
its  beauties.     As  it  is,  there  seems  to  have  been  nothing  eTtt 
written  about  it.   Indeed,  I  have  never  seen  any  account  of  a 
trip  on  a  kellik  down  this  part  of  the  Tigris. 

Between  Diarbekir  and  Mosul  there  must  be  a  consider- 
able fall  in  the  bed  of  the  river,  over  which  we  passed  yester- 
day ;  for  in  great  part  of  it  we  have  come  over  rapids,  not  in 
any  way  dangerous  for  the  kellik  so  long  as  you  can  keep 
it  fairly  afloat,  but  sufficiently  noisy  and  rapid  to  create  i 
little  excitement.  These  kelliks  seem  to  me  to  be  well 
adapted  for  shooting  rapids,  and  the  different  rows  or  lines  rf 
skins  suited  to  the  surface  of  the  rapid,  there  being  no  abeo- 
lute  rigidity  about  it ;  so  they  go  spinning  along  round  and 
round,  it  being  the  same  to  them  which  part  goes  first 

Almost  all  the  villages  we  passed  yesterday  were  mere  dwell- 
ings cut  out  of  the  solid  rock,  no  doubt  originally  meant 
for  the  dead,  but  have  now  become  habitations  for  the  living. 
At  one  place  we  passed  (Hassan  Sef)  are  the  ruins  of  what 
must  have  been  a  place  of  considerable  importance  in  days 
gone  by.  There  are  still  standing  the  four  enormous  piers  of 
a  bridge,  thirty  feet  high,  which  once  spanned  the  river, and 
two  rather  handsome  minarets,  perhaps  fifty  feet  high — one 
of  them  now  crowned  with  a  stork's  nest,  the  mosques  to  which 
they  must  once  have  been  attached,  for  anything  we  conM 


THE  KHURDS— LIMESTONE  HILLS.  345 

discoTer  from  the  deck  of  the  hellik^  having  entirely  dis- 
appeared. The  perpendicular  limestone  cliffs  on  both  sides  of 
the  river,  bnt  principally  on  the  left-hand  side  near  this 
ruin,  rising  to  a  height  of  about  150  feet,  are  completely 
honeycombed.  They  are  as  full  of  ancient  tombs  as  they 
can  be. 

It  was  cold  in  onr  tent  yesterday,  the  thermometer  mark- 
ing Sd"";  to-day  it  stands  at  65°,  and  in  the  sun  82^  Many 
considerable  streams  have  joined  on  to  the  stream  we  started 
with  fix>m  Diarbekir,  and  at  times  to-day  the  Tigris  has 
widened  out  to  a  couple  of  hundred  yards  or  more ;  but  for 
many  hours  it  has  been  hemmed  in  between  limestone  cliffs, 
often  perpendicular,  and  in  some  places  even  overhanging 
the  river,  and  rising  to  a  height  of  from  100  to  1500  feet, 
backed  up  by  hills  even  3000  feet  above  their  base.  During 
the  early  part  of  the  day  we  floated  along  between  undulat- 
ing green  hills,  meeting  with  many  villages,  and  invariably 
npon  the  shore  opposite  to  each  village  a  bevy  of  women, 
dressed  in  the  brightest  of  colours,  were  occupied  in  boiling 
water  and  washiDg  clothes;  but  wherever  the  river  was 
pressed  into  smaller  compass  by  the  cliffs  on  each  side,  the 
Khurds  might  be  seen  emerging  from  their  caverns  on  to  the 
precipices,  which  looked  as  if  not  affording  foothold  even  for 
a  goat.  Here  the  limestone  hills  took  all  sorts  of  shapes — 
columns,  spires,  towers,  and  cupolas  in  abundance ;  terraces 
one  above  another,  rising  from  the  river  to  hundreds  of  feet 
in  height,  all  fringed  with  young,  fresh-looking,  green  trees, 
with  an  outline  of  endless  variety  of  shape,  where  the  like- 
ness of  everything  on  earth  might  be  found.  These  rapids 
are  not  so  harmless  as  I  thought  they  were,  for  this  season 
alone  fifteen  kelliks  laden  with  grain  have  been  lost  upon 
them.    We  have  tried,  but  have  caught  no  fish  yet. 

Jezirek  liu  Omar. — We  reached  this  place  at  6  p.m.  last 
evening,  after  a  float  of  fourteen  hours,  never  progressing  at 
a  less  rate  than  four  miles  an  hour,  and  from  seven  to  eight 
miles  an  hour  down  the  rapids,  which  were  innumerable 
yesterday.  We  have  been  detained  here  until  nine  this 
morning  by  Mr  J.'s  business. 

\2tk — This  is  a  large  village,  with  a  bazaar,  situated  on 
an  island  where  the  river  widens  out  considerably.      It  is 


346        TIFTEKS—ARK  RESTED  ON  JUDIDAK 

the  central  depot  for  the  coUection  and  sale  of  txJUitM^  or 
goat's  hair,  in  which  business  is  done  to  a  large  amoimt  at 
this  season.  The  price  at  present  for  all  white  hair  is  aboii 
36  piastres  the  oke,  or  about  2s.  per  pound.  The  qoalitj  rf 
this  wool  is  perhaps  not  equal  to  the  Angora,  which  it 
greatly  resembles.  I  am  told  there  are  some  700,000  Ibi 
brought  annually  to  this  place  for  sale.  Visited  an  old 
church,  now  a  mosque,  with  highly-ornamented  doors,  and 
numerous  Arabic  inscriptions  around  them,  and  SarMenie 
work  surmounting  them.  Two  Boman  bridges  span  tiie 
river,  one  of  them  still  serviceable,  but  the  other,  wbidi 
must  have  been  a  noble  work,  judging  by  what  remains  of 
it,  is  a  ruin,  one  arch  only  remaining  entire,  and  the  abofc- 
ments  of  another,  which  must  have  been  a  span  of  nearly  100 
feet 

Our  hilly  scenery  has  dwindled  down  into  gently  undoht- 
ing  ground,  with  the  exception  of  one  short  ridge  to  the 
south  of  us,  some  twenty  miles  distant,  the  outline  of  which 
somewhat  resembles  a  huge  human  figure  lying  upon  iti 
back,  with  just  snow  enough  on  the  pit  of  the  stomach  to 
keep  it  cool  in  this  hot  weather,  the  face  being  deconted 
with  a  particularly  large  nose,  upon  the  point  of  which  the 
natives  say  the  ark  rested ;  if  so,  it  must  have  had  a  vetj 
uncomfortable  resting-place.  The  figure  is  called  Jodidib. 
The  river  on  emerging  from  Jezireh  is  from  one  to  two 
hundred  yards  wide,  flowing  placidly  along  at  the  rate  of 
four  miles  an  hour.  Thermometer  in  the  shade  70\  My 
aneroid  has  risen  since  we  left  Diarbekir  7^  tenths  (or  7S0 
feet),  2\  tenths  of  which  I  attribute  to  the  change  in  the 
weather,  and  5  tenths  (or  500  feet)  to  the  fall  in  the  ri?er, 
making  Jezireh  Ibu  Omar — the  Island  of  Omar — ^to  be  600 
feet  below  Diarbekir,  or  about  1700  feet  above  the  Medite^ 
ranean. 

13^^. — We  pulled  up  last  evening  at  8  Km.,  afterafloit 
of  eleven  hours,  over,  I  think,  some  sixty  to  seventy  mOes 
of  ground.  The  river  continues  broad,  but  the  navigation  a 
good  deal  interrupted  by  sandbanks  formed  in  the  middle 
of  it ;  the  banks  on  both  sides  for  the  most  part  low.  In 
the  distance  are  some  high  mountains  covered  with  snow. 
We  have  been  passing  through  a  region  much  exposed  to 


DESERTED  VILLAGES— KHURDS.  347 

the  raidfi  of  the  Arabs,  bo  we  had  to  sleep  on  our  armB.  We 
passed  several  deserted  yillages  yesterday  and  this  morning, 
the  result  of  an  extensive  Arab  raid  of  last  year.  We  have 
been  hard  up  for  provisions,  for  in  Jezireh  we  could  find 
only  one  chicken ;  so  this  morning  we  went  in  a  body  to  a 
Khordish  village,  in  which  we  had  observed  signs  of  life,  and 
fiocceededy  after  a  deal  of  talk,  in  securing  one  chicken,  some 
milk,  and  a  dozen  of  eggs.  It  was  a  small  village,  and  un- 
accostomed  to  receive  visits  from  strangers,  so  the  whole 
population — men,  women,  and  children,  old  and  young — 
flocked  around  us.  The  women  were  elaborately  tattooed  all 
over  the  face,  and  the  young  ones  were  not  bad  looking. 
They  do  not  cover  their  faces,  as  the  Turkish  women  do,  on 
the  approach  of  strangers.  I  had  a  dressing-gown  on,  in 
which  I  slept  on  board  the  hellik^  the  tassels  of  which  the 
Shards  admired  very  much.  It  is  now  4  p.m.,  and  I  am 
afraid  we  are  moored  for  the  night,  for  it  blows  a  stiffish 
breeze,  sufficient  to  make  the  kellik  perfectly  unmanageable. 
Our  progress  to-day  has  been  very  unsatisfactory,  for  we  have 
had  to  pull  up  many  times  since  we  left  our  last  night's 
restiog-place,  on  account  of  the  wind,  and  once  we  were  as 
nearly  wrecked  as  could  be,  by  being  all  but  forced  upon  a 
point  around  which  the  current  ran  with  great  rapidity.  At 
Jezireh  we  left  one  of  our  crew,  so  we  have  now  bat  one 
hand  on  board,  representing  the  whole  crew.  Two  of  our 
servants  have  gone  off  to  a  village  on  a  hill,  some  little 
distance,  in  search  of  provisions,  for  we  have  six  mouths  to 
satisfy,  and  this  sort  of  life,  always  in  the  open  air,  breeds 
ravenous  appetites.  We  have  tried  to  catch  some  fish,  but 
have  had  no  luck :  the  water  is  so  muddy,  the  result  of  con- 
tinuous rain,  that  they  cannot,  I  think,  see  the  bait.  It  was 
cold  last  night,  and  so  it  was  this  morning  until  the  sun  had 
been  above  the  horizon  for  some  hours.  Our  foragers  have 
just  returned  without  bringing  any  supplies.  Paeiencia  !  It 
is  time  we  had  reached  Mosul,  and  wis  may  do  so  to-morrow 
if  we  have  any  luck. 

On  the  evening  of  the  13th  we  stopped  at  a  village  eight 
hours  from  Mosul.  Sandbanks  we  frequently  met  with, 
ofiering  serious  obstruction  to  the  navigation  of  the  river. 
At  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  I4th  we  were  floating 


348  ARRIVAL  AT  MOSUL. 

down  to  Mosul,   and  at  9  a.m.    we  arrived   there  in  fife 
hoars  from  our  resting-place,  in  place  of  eight  hours,  wUck  . 
it  would  have  taken  us  with  the  river  in  its  ordinary  stite 
of  fulness.     At  the  landing-place  there  were  hundreds  d 
people  collected,  eager  all  of  them  to  convey  our  Inggip 
and  our  tent  to  any  part  of  the  town  we  liked,  and  we  landed 
amid  a  babel  of  voices.     The  tent,  on  men's  shoulders,  ncnt 
first ;  there  was  just  room  enough  in  the  street  for  it  to  pM 
without  jamming,  although  it  brought  up  occasionaDy  all 
standing    under    some  of   the  archways.       We    followed, 
keeping  as  bright  a  look-out  after  the  half-dozen  fellawi 
who  carried  our  personal  luggage  as  a  dense  throng  would 
permit  us.     We  soon  arrived  at  the  khan,  Mr  Bassam'e, 
where  the  tent  was  deposited  in  the  yard,  and  our  luggage 
carried  to  a  couple  of  rooms  opening  out  upon  a  corridor  or 
balcony  up-stairs,  and  after  half  an  hour's  wrangling  with 
the  porters  as  to  what  we  were  to  pay,  we  quietly  settled  down 
We  had  had   some  breakfast  on   board  the  kellik^  so  we 
rubbed  up  a  bit,  and  went  off  to  pay  our  respects  to  the  Con- 
sul (Mr  Rassam),  to  whom  I  had  a  letter  of  introdoctbn. 
We  found  the  Consul  reclining  on  a  divan,  in  convenatioB 
with  two   or   three    natives.     After  reading  my  letta,  he 
insisted  on  our  coming  to  stay  with  him ;  so  our  traps  were 
sent  for,  and  we  took  up  our  quarters  in  a  very  comfoitabk 
room  under  his  roof.     Mr  Bassam's  is   the  best  bouse  ie 
Mosul ;  in  fact,  it  is  a  handsome  house,  and  in  Italy  it 
would  have  some  pretensions  to  be  called  a  palace.   The 
courtyard  has  a  garden  in  the  centre,  and  on  two  sides  of  it 
are  two  fine  vaulted   rooms,  which  may   be  designated  a 
dining-room  and    a  reception-room,  both  entirely  open  ia 
front  to  the  courtyard.     The  walls  all  round  are  of  marble 
surmounted   by   an    elaborate    inscription,    not   from  the 
Koran,  but  consisting  of  prayers  in  Arabic,  the  vaulted  vxi 
being  tastefully  painted  in  blue  and  white.     Mr  Rassam  is  an 
old  man,  well  on  towards  eighty  I  should  say,  and  employs 
pretty  nearly  the  whole  of  his  time  working  at  a  translir 
tion  of  the  Bible  from  the  Hebrew  text  into  Arabic.    Accord- 
ing to  his  account,  our  English  translation  is  full  of  gross 
errors.     All  his  thoughts  seem  to  be  concentrated  on  tliis 
work,   but   he  has  little  prospect,  I   should  say,  of  cTer 


NINE  VEH.  349 

neiDg  it  finished,  or  of  having  any  part  of  it  put  into  Eng- 
lish and  published,  before  he  is  called  to  his  last  acconnt. 
After  arranging  for  a  fresh  hellik  to  proceed  the  day  after 
faHnorrow  to  Bagdad,  we  took  passage  in  a  ferryboat  for 
Um  eastern  side  of  the  Tigris,  and  in  half  an  hour  after 
landing,  we  reached  the  scene  of  Mr  Layard's  operations  on 
the  monnds  representing  all  that  is  left  of  the  ancient  city 
rf  Nineveh.  Our  walk  lay  across  rich  land,  covered 
with  crops  of  wheat  and  barley,  and  fields  of  water-melons 
JQBt  showing  above  gronnd.  The  first  monnd  we  reached 
covers  many  acres,  and  seems  to  have  been  completely  ran- 
neked  of  all  its  treasures ;  it  is  all  over  full  of  perpen- 
(Geolar  excavations  and  long  horizontal  galleries,  but  we 
KW  not  a  single  bas-relief  or  statue  of  any  kind ;  every- 
thing that  had  been  met  with  seems  to  have  been  carried  ofi*, 
tnd  for  the  most  part  may  now  be  seen  in  the  British 
Musenm.  Further  on  stands  another  mound,  in  a  line  of 
nised  ground  representing  the  wall  which  enclosed  the 
dtj ;  and  here  we  saw  the  only  pieces  of  sculpture  disin- 
teired  which  remain  in  their  original  position — two  winged 
human-headed  bulls,  one  on  each  side  of  what  was  once  a 
gateway,  in  a  pretty  nearly  perfect  state.  These  bulls  are 
of  alalmster,  and,  with  the  human  figures  carved  out  of  the 
same  block,  measure  twenty-one  feet  in  length,  and  about 
thirteen  feet  in  height,  and  three  feet  in  breadth  ;  they  have 
been  left  where  they  were  found — other  bulls  resembling 
them  in  all  respects,  I  believe,  having  been  already  sent  to 
the  British  Museum.  We  groped  about  for  four  or  five 
hours  among  the  excavations,  but  found  not  a  single  thing 
to  bring  away  with  us.  A  porcupine  quill  (however  it 
eune  there)  is  the  only  trophy  from  the  rains  of  this  great 
city,  and  the  only  thing  I  brought  away  with  me.  Weather 
unsettled.  Thermometer  in  my  room  70^  It  is  very  diffi- 
cult to  find  out  the  population  of  any  of  these  Turkish 
towns,  no  statistics  are  or  ever  have  been  kept.  Mr  R 
teUs  me  that  Mosul  contains  100,000  inhabitants,  of  whom 
90,000  are  Mahometans  and  10,000  Christians,  whilst  a 
Dr  C.  who  is  here  sets  the  population  at  from  40,000  to 
50,000.     The  Mahometan  women  in  the  street  cover  their 


352  TEKRIT^RIVER   WIDENS. 

hour  up  to  the  present  moment  (noon),  so   that  we  hope, 
notwithstanding   our   bad    beginning    yesterday,    to  read 
Bagdad   possibly  to-morrow   night,    for   the   river   is  v«j 
much   swollen,  and   consequently  very  rapid.     The   banb 
have  been  very  low  and  alluvial  since  we  left  Mosul,  and  to-dqr 
we    are  passing  hundreds  of  creaking   wheels,   worked  bj 
bullocks,  drawing  up  water  from  the  river  in   hide  buckeb 
for  irrigation,  so  it  would  seem  that  down  here  the  rain  of 
yesterday  did  not  reach.     Our  boatman,  as  we  pass  down 
stream,  keeps  up,  when  near  enough,  a  running  conversatioB 
with  the  men  working  the  water-wheels,  and  one  of  them 
asked  him  this  morning  what  day  of  the  week  it  was.    These 
kelliks  are  not  such  safe  and   comfortable   conveyances  as 
one  in  calm  weather  and  a  moderate  current  is  apt  to  suppose. 
In  windy  weather  they  are  difficult  to  manage,  and  witiioat 
great  care  are  exposed  to  come  to  grief,  so  utterly  unmanage- 
able do  they  become ;  but  it  is  marvellous  to  me,  I  must 
confess,  how  much  rough  usage  these  skins  can  stand  with- 
out sustaining  serious  damage.     The  river  now  is  everywhere 
a  good  200  yards  in  breadth,  and  in  many  places  we  come 
to  four  times  that   breadth.      Islands  there  are  in  abun- 
dance ;  and  if  we  had  been  left  yesterday  on  the  island  fimn 
which    the   kellik  broke  adrift   when   we    were    on   shore, 
heaven  only  knows  how  long  we  might  have  had  to  remain 
there,  for  it  is  not  possible  for  these  kelliks  ever  to  retrace 
against  stream  a  single  yard  of  the  ground  they  have  gone 
over.     Ducks  and  pelicans  are  numerous,  and   occasionally 
a  jay  of  beautiful  plumage  makes  his  appearance  on  tlie 
banks. 

20tL — We  have  just  left  Tekrit;  where  we  brought  up  aboat 
2  A.M.,  after  a  continuous  float  of  twenty-six  hours,  at  the 
rate  of  about  six  miles  an  hour,  seldom  less,  but  frequently, 
where  the  river  became  narrower,  a  knot  more.  Fine  weather, 
a  bright  moon,  and  a  willing  boatman  enabled  us  to  make 
this  long  satisfactory  day's  work.  Before  we  reached  Tekrit 
the  Tigris  must  have  spread  out  to  a  mile  in  width.  Height 
above  the  sea  at  Tekrit  about  500  feet  I  have  had  a  ran 
through  the  town,  the  only  place  of  note  between  Mosul  and 
Bagdad.  The  present  town  or  valley  seems  to  have  been 
built  out  of  the  materials  that  composed  the  old  town,  partlj 


RUINS—VISIT  FROM  AN  ARAB  WOMAN       353 

of  burnt,  and  partly  of  sun-dried  bricks.     There  is  the  min 

in  the  present  town  of  what  was  once  a  fortress  overlooking 

the  river,  and  we  had  pointed  •nt  to  ns  three  bnrnt  bricks 

in  a  wall,  with  the  name,  doubtless,  of  some  emperor  in  the 

Cufic  character.     Oatside  there  is  a  large  piece  of  ground 

coTered  with  heaps  of  rubbish  and  sun-burnt  bricks ;  and  I 

entered  some  old  buildings  through  archways  nflfw  entirely 

below  the  surface  of  the  ground,  all  insignificant  in  size. 

Here  I  have  seen  the  first  circular  boats,  composed  of  a 

framework  of  reeds  with  a  covering  of  asphaltum.      The 

banks  of  the  river  are  low,  and  the  creaking  water-wheels 

npon  them  indicate  the  employment  of  the  villagers.     None 

of  the  rain  we  were  so  plentifully  supplied  with  soon  after 

we  left  Mosul  seems  to  have  reached  down  here.    At  5.30 

A.M.  we  left  Tekrit,  said  to  be  the  birthplace  of  Saladin. 

As  we  floated  down  the  stream  about  an  hour  ago,  where  the 

width  was  about  half  a  mile,  a  woman  came  off  to  us  leaning 

npon  an  inflated  skin ;  in   one   hand   she  held  an  earthen 

platter  holding  a  couple  of  pounds  of  fresh  butter,  and  upon 

ber  head  she  bore  another  platter  filled  with  boiled  greens  ; 

with  the  other  hand  and  her  feet  she  propelled  the  skin 

through  the  water.     She  came  up  to  our  kellik  laughing, 

and  such  a   splendid   mouthful   of  teeth  she   showed  us  I 

Her  face  was  well  tattooed,  and  the  rest  of  her  body  also,  I 

daresay ;  but  of  course  she  had  her  clothes  on,  so  we  could 

not  tell  about  that.     We  bought  her  butter  and  greens,  and 

sent  her  off  well  pleased.     All  these  Arabs  about  here  have 

particularly  good  teeth,  owing  probably  to  their  simple  diet 

We  have  at  last  met  with  another  kellik^  bound  to  Bagdad, 

Bo  we  keep  company. 

Hit. — We  have  been  moving  along  all  night  very  slowly, 
the  river  good  two  miles  broad,  and  the  current  not  running 
more  than  a  mile  and  a  half,  or  two  knots  an  hour.  It  is 
very  muddy  in  consequence  of  the  heavy  rains  that  have 
fallen  in  the  upper  port  of  it  during  the  last  two  months, 
bat  which  have  quite  failed  to  reach  this  neighbourhood,  so 
that  the  creaking  water-wheels,  of  which  we  must  have 
passed  some  thousands  fixed  on  the  banks  of  the  river  during 
the  last  two  days,  are  kept  going  night  and  day.  We  have 
been  constantly  asked  by  the  men  on  shore  where  we  left 


354  ARRIVAL  AT BA GDAD. 

the  rain  ?  The  crops  of  grain  look  very  well ;  the  vleit 
and  barley,  very  thickly  Bown,  are  in  ear,  and  next  month 
will  be  ready  for  reaping.  The  irrigation  the  land  iB  getting 
now  most  be  a  fair  dressing  for  it,  the  quantity  of  8oQ 
brought  down  with  the  water  being  so  great  In  olden 
times  a  network  of  aqueducts  ran  through  the  whole  of  this 
alluvial  country ;  now  the  water  is  only  raised  from  the 
river  by  the  simple  appliances  I  have  mentioned,  suited  to 
a  most  primitive  people.  We  have  fastened  our  hMik  on 
to  our  companion,  which  is  loaded  with  cheese  packed  in 
sheep-skins,  and  we  look  the  more  formidable  as  we  mm 
slowly  along.  The  Arab  merchants,  the  owners  of  the  caijo, 
accompany  it  in  the  hellik.  We  are  now  passing  a  long 
line  of  the  date-palm  trees,  said  to  have  resulted  firom  the 
stones  strewn  in  their  path  by  the  retreating  10,000  Greeks. 

22rf. — Arrived  at  Bagdad  at  2  p.m.  Yesterday,  SoBday, 
as  we  approached  the  city,  the  river  having  widened  out  in 
all  appearance  to  a  lake,  for  many  hours  our  pace  did  not 
exceed  three  or  four  miles  an  hour.  The  weather  was  W!7 
fine,  and  for  some  four  hours  we  floated  along  with  a  goodlj 
plantation  of  date-palms  on  each  side  of  us.  The  banks, 
however,  are  low  everywhere  ;  no  high  land  to  be  seen  even 
in  the  distance.  On  arriving  close  to  Bagdad,  we  embaiked, 
bag  and  baggage,  in  one  of  the  kii/aSj  or  circular  boats,  com- 
mon on  this  part  of  the  Tigris. 

The  one  we  got  into  had  nine  persons  in  it,  with  a  largish 
quantity  of  luggage,  and  was  capable  of  accommodating  as 
many  more  people,  and  as  much  more  luggage.  They  ut 
paddled  along,  and  get  over  the  ground  at  a  fair  pace,  asd 
I  should  think  it  quite  impossible  to  capsize  them.  We 
landed  at  the  customhouse,  and  thence  we  passed  on  to  a 
khan,  where  we  took  possession  of  two  cells — I  can't  call 
them  rooms — guiltless  of  any  sort  of  window.  Hey  might 
have  been  eleven  feet  by  eight,  with  an  arched  roof,  and 
some  twelve,  or  thirteen  feet  high  in  the  centre,  built  of  kiln- 
burnt  bricks,  and  with  a  strong  jail-^like  door,  which  I  was 
obliged  to  leave  wide  open  during  the  night,  or  run  the  risk 
of  being  stifled  in  my  sleep,  so  close  was  the  place  and 
without  any  ventilation.  Although  this  khan  is  of  leant 
construction,  it  is  already  as  disgustingly  dirty  as  any  <^ 


i 

KHAN  AT  BAGDAD-^CONSUI^GENERAL,       355  '   , 

the  khans  it  has  been  my  fortune  to  sleep  in  between  this 
and  Alexandria.      Besides  the  dirt,    every  other   available 
comer  than  the  two  cells  we  were  in  were  crammed  with 
hides,  and  an  old  Arab  kept  watch  over  the  whole  contents, 
animate  and  inanimate ;  he  was  always  in  motion,  and  had 
always  some  remark  to  make  as  he  passed  my  door.     Night 
came  on  in  due  time,  and  we  laid  ourselves  down  to  sleep. 
Our  doors  were  of  necessity  left  wide  open.    The  moon  shone 
brightly,  and  for  a  time  I  beguiled  the  hours  by  watching 
the  shadows  thrown  upon  the  corridor  or  verandah  by  a 
noble  date-palm  stirred  by  the  wind,  which  grows  in  the 
centre  of  the  khan  courtyard ;  at  last  I  became  unconscious, 
both  of  the  date-palm  growing  in  the  courtyard,   and  the 
diriy  old  Arab  who  incessantly  passed  my  door;  but  the 
whole  blessed  night  afterwards  I  believed  I  was  sleeping  on 
the  edge  of  a  knife,  and  I  was  not  sorry  when  the  sun  got 
above  the  horizon,  and  it  was  time  for  me  also  to  rise.     The  ' 

cook-shops  of  the  city  being  principally  in  the  hands  of 
Armenians  (Christians),  we  could  find  nothing  to  eat  yester- 
day evening,  but  this  morning  we  sallied  out  to  see  what 
could  be  got  at  the  bazaar,  and  then  and  there  eating  what- 
ever we  might  find ;  but  dirty  as  our  khan  was,  we  found 
there  could  be  dirtier  places  still,  and  the  cook-shops'  accom- 
modation was  so  filthy  that  we  preferred  having  the  breakfast 
brought  to  us  at  the  khan  to  eating  it  on  the  spot. 

At  noon  we  paid  a  visit  to  our  Consul-General,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Herbert,  to  whom  I  delivered  my  letter  of  introduc- 
tion, and  he  at  once  insisted  on  our  coming  immediately  to 
his  house ;  there  we  are  once  again  in  very  comfortable 
quarters.  From  Mosul  we  have  travelled  over  in  seventy- 
eight  hours  about  300  miles,  the  distance  being  as  the  crow 
flies  a  hundred  miles  less.  Thermometer  at  noon  in  our 
room  76**. 

On  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Tigris,  opposite  to  Tekrit,  are 
the  plains  of  Dura,  and  soon  after  leaving  Tekrit  we  came  in 
sight  of  a  tall  white  tower,  a  Mussulman  tomb,  said  to  mark 
the  spot  where  Nebuchadnezzar  set  up  the  golden  calf  and 
called  together  the  princes  of  the  land  to  worship  it  Here 
also  it  was  that  the  great  battle  was  fought  between  Shapour, 


356  BAGDAD  TO  BABYLON. 

the  Persian  king,  and  Jovian,  which  resulted  in  the  eessioa 
to  Persia  of  the  five  eastern  Boman  provinces. 

A  spiral  tower,  which  Layard  says  is  200  feet  high,  soon 
afterwards  makes  its  appearance  also  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  river.  It  marks  the  site  of  the  ancient  city  of  Samarrah. 
Other  ruins  show  themselves  on  both  sides  as  the  keUik  floati 
down  the  swollen  stream,  and  numerous  shapeless  mounda, 
until  the  line  of  date-palms  which  I  have  already  mentioned 
makes  its  appearance,  and  tells  us  that  we  are  approachu^ 
the  City  of  the  Caliphs. 

26^^,  Mahawell  Khan. — Yesterday,  half  an  hour  after 
noon,  I  left  Colonel  Herbert's,  and  got  into  a  basket,  aod 
was  paddled  across  the  Tigris,  where  a  muleteer  with  mnbi 
and  horses  was  waiting  to  start  with  me^  for  the  minf  of 
Babylon,  distant  from  Bagdad  between  fifty  and  sixty  milei 
I  had  my  servant  with  me,  and  a  lancer  from  the  Gfovero- 
ment,  and  a  Kawas  from  the  Consulate.  It  was  more  thai 
half  an  hour  before  the  animals  made  their  appearance  aod 
were  ready  to  commence  the  journey.  A  gale  from  the 
south  (a  hot  wind)  was  blowing  at  the  time,  and  continoed 
during  the  whole  day,  raising  such  a  cloud  of  dust,  that  o& 
our  whole  ride  of  five  hours,  when  we  reached  our  resting- 
place  for  the  night,  the  Mahmovdigah  Khan,  we  could  scarcely 
see  a  hundred  yards  ahead,  and  the  horses  at  times  w^ 
with  difficulty  made  to  face  it :  so  that  I  confess  I  was  glad 
to  reach  the  khan,  though  we  did  find  it,  during  the  whde 
night,  a  complete  Babel.  The  noise  made  by  the  animals,  and 
the  bipeds  their  masters,  prevented  me  from  getting  a  wink 
of  sleep  all  night,  and  I  was  up  and  making  ready  for  a  start 
by  3  A.M.,  and  at  4.30  we  were  in  the  saddle ;  at  noon  we 
reached  this  khan,  the  best  on  the  line  of  road. 

After  leaving  Bagdad  yesterday  we  passed  over  a  small 
extent  of  cultivated  ground,  but  we  soon  lost  all  trace  of  it, 
and  our  route  since  has  been  over  an  arid  plain,  diversi- 
fied in  parts  by  sandhills,  and  for  a  great  many  miles  lite^ 
ally  covered  with  bits  of  broken  pottery  and  bricks,  and 
every  here  and  there  parts  of  walls  showing  themselTei 
above  ground.  The  whole  extent  of  the  plain  shows  traces 
of  a  network  of  ancient  canals,  at  one  time  used  for  bringing 
water  for  irrigation  from  the  Euphrates,  when  no  doubt  all 


BABYLON— HILLAH.  357 

this  now  arid  plain  was  covered  with  crops.  We  stopped 
half  an  hour  this  morning  at  the  Haswa  Ehan^  four  honrs 
from  this,  to  give  onr  horses  water  and  a  feed  of  grass,  than 
which  they  get  nothing  at  this  season,  and  they  are  conse- 
qnently  not  np  to  a  long  day's  work.  At  the  Hoswa  Khan 
I  bought  half  a  score  of  antiques,  consisting  of  engraved 
Btones  and  coins.  I  paid  but  a  trifle  for  them,  though  they 
may  not  be  worth  much.  The  ruins  of  Babylon  commence 
Tery  near  to  this  khan.  Thermometer  in  this  room  at  5 
A.1L,  84**. 

27M,  Hillah. — This  town,  Rich  says,  is  only  forty-eight 
miles  from  Bagdad;  it  is  certainly  good  sixty-five  miles. 
It  is  called  by  Abulfeda,  Hillah  Bene  Mozaid :  built  in  1101, 
in  the  land  of  Babel.  The  Euphrates  at  the  bridge  at  Hillah 
it  450  feet^  broad;  depth,  15  feet;  average  current,  two 
miles  an  hour.  From  tiie  roof  of  the  house  in  which  I  slept 
last  night,  the  mounds,  all  that  is  left  of  ancient  Babylon, 
•eem  to  be  close  at  hand,  and  a  long  range  of  the  Euplu'ates 
IB  seen,  with  its  banks  covered  by  thousands  of  the  date- 
pahn.  The  whole  country,  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach,  is  a 
desert,  barring  a  very  small  amount  of  cultivation  here  and 
there,  but  the  network  of  ancient  canals  one  sees  tells  a 
itory  of  another  and  di£ferent  state  of  things  once  existing 
in  the  valley  of  the  Euphrates.  Only  run  a  railway  through 
it,  and  doubtless  prosperity  will  return.  It  would  be  the 
highway  for  a  great  trade  between  the  East  and  the  West ; 
and  besides  this,  which  would  not  be  a  matter  of  slight 
importance  to  England,  a  railway  would  offer  cheap  transit 
on  ita  way  to  her  shores  for  what  would  be  the  staple  of 
this  country — its  grain,  for  the  growth  of  which  to  an  enor- 
mona  extent  no  country  would  seem  to  be  better  adapted 
than  this  valley. 

At  4  A.M.  we  were  in  the  saddle.  The  morning  was  most 
brilliant — a  sky  without  the  vestige  of  a  cloud,  lighted  up 
by  a  moon  that  had  lost  but  little  of  its  brightness :  it  was 
nineteen  days  old.  However,  the  sun  entered  on  his  domain 
soon  after  we  were  in  the  saddle,  and  the  moon  s  beams  were 
aa  if  they  never  had  been.  I  would  have  bargained  for  a 
continoanoe  of  the  moon,  or  rather  for  a  discontinuance  of 
the  sun,  if  I  could  have  found  any  reliable  person  to  bargain 


358  BABYLON— RICH. 

with ;  but  as  I  could  not,  I  had  to  bear  all  the  son's  heat 
as  I  best  could  during  my  six  hours'  ride — and  it  was  prettj 
stiff— over  the  desert,  with  not  a  breath  of  air  stirring  to 
temper  it.  At  this  moment,  in  the  coolest  of  rooms  (I  mean 
relatively),  the  thermometer  stands  at  86^  Abont  thne 
hours  after  we  left  the  khan,  we  arrived  at  the  first  of  ihe 
Babylonian  mounds,  called  by  the  Arabs  BabeL  A  long 
detour  we  had  to  make  to  cross  a  canal  which  viras  drawiiig 
off  a  large  supply  of  water  from  the  Euphrates :  it  took  v 
four  miles  out  of  the  direct  road  to  Hillah,  and  when  ve 
reached  it,  what  did  we  see  ?  Very  extensive  excavations 
made  by  Rich  and  others,  long  afterwards  by  Layard, 
without  producing  anything  of  interest  in  the  shape  of 
sculpture  to  throw  the  slightest  gleam  of  light  on  Baby- 
lonian history.  Walls  (brickwork)  in  abundance,  principallj 
sun-dried  bricks,  but  not  wholly,  have  been  laid  bare,  Imt 
the  meaning  of  this  brickwork  has  not  been  even  guessed 
at.  The  bricks  in  this  mound  are  all,  I  believe,  square, 
12^  inches,  and  nearly  3  inches  thick,  having  without 
exception  a  cuneiform  inscription  in  the  centre,  6  inches  long 
and  4^  broad,  composed  of  seven  lines,  and  laid  sometimes 
in  asphaltum,  and  sometimes  in  a  thin  layer  of  mortar,  and 
very  generally  with  a  layer  of  reeds  between  the  courses, 
particularly  between  those  that  are  laid  in  asphaltmn.  It  ii 
a  dirt  mound  now  for  the  most  part,  and  mixed  with  broken 
bricks,  pottery,  and  glass,  a  shapeless  mass.  Such  is  Babel 
now,  or  whatever  else  it  might  have  been.  We  now  pro- 
ceeded to  another  mound,  considered  of  greater  importance 
than  any  other  on  the  east  side  of  the  river,  MugiUbe,  or 
the  Babel  of  Rich.  Here  Bich  found  a  wooden  coffin 
containing  a  skeleton  entombed  in  brickwork,  and  Layard, 
following  up  tlie  gallery  in  which  Rich  had  found  one 
coffin,  discovered  several  more,  but  they  contained  skelebHis 
only,  and  no  ornaments  of  any  description.  On  the  north 
side  of  this  mound  is  a  cyclopean  mass  of  brickwork,  all  show- 
ing itself  well  above  ground,  and  looking  as  fresh  as  if  it  were 
the  work  of  yesterday.  It  is  a  meaningless  mass  of  brick- 
work, so  far  as  the  present  generation  is  concerned,  bat  not 
useless,  for  the  bricks  used  in  building  Hillah  have  been  taken 
from  it ;  and  there  are  still  bricks  left,  if  they  can  only  be  got 


HILLAH—A  FUNERAL.  359 

apart,  sufficient  to  build  half-a-dozen  more  Hillaha.  Aboat 
a  mUe  from  this  mass  of  brickwork,  I  saw  the  onlj  piece  of 
statuary  these  mounds  have  produced,  a  lion  out  out  of  lime- 
stone, discovered  by  Bich,  now  lying  on  its  side,  a  good  deal 
defaced  and  half  buried  in  sand ;  but  when  discovered,  it  was 
in  an  upright  position,  and  standing  over  a  man  whose  arms 
are  outstretched.  I  brought  a  good  many  pieces  of  inscribed 
brick  with  me  to  the  khan  at  Hillah,  but  found  I  could  buy 
more  perfect  specimens  for  a  mere  bagatelle  from  the  men 
who  have  passed  all  their  lives  in  despoiling  the  great  city  of 
Nebuchadnezzar.  The  thermometer  in  my  cool  room  steads 
at  90%  and  nevertheless  I  have  just  returned  from  a  walk  in 
the  blazing  sun  of  two  miles,  where  the  thermometer  might 
be  900*"  for  aught  I  know.  I  went  out  to  deliver  a  letter, 
accompanied  by  the  Consulate  Kawas,  a  portly  man,  the 
^asha  of  Bagdad's  Kawas,  and  my  own  servant.  The 
Consulate  Kawas  was  as  clean  as  a  new  pin.  The  moment 
we  arrived  from  the  ruins  of  Babylon,  he  took  off  his  boots  (by- 
the-by,  he  does  not  wear  stockings,  but  the  general  public 
don't  know  that),  and  sent  them  to  the  bazaar  to  be  cleaned, 
and  without  the  slightest  compunction,  apparently,  for  the 
disrespect  with  which  he  was  treating  the  dust  of  his  great 
ancestor  Nebuchadnezzar,  he  vigorously  brushed  from  his 
coat  and  trousers  every  atom  of  dust  he  had  brought  with 
him  from  the  ruins.  I,  on  the  contrary,  could  not  even 
make  up  my  mind  to  have  my  boots  cleaned,  much  less  to 
have  the  twenty  pounds  of  dust  I  brought  with  me  from  the 
ruins  ruthlessly  swept  off.  The  feeling  I  have  for  the  great 
man  would  not  permit  me  to  commit  such  an  atrocity.  The 
Consulate  Kawas  walked  first,  as  clean  as  he  could '  make 
himself;  I  followed,  covered  from  head  to  foot  with  the  dust 
of  Nebuchadnezzar ;  and  the  Pasha's  Kawas  and  my  servant 
brought  up  the  rear.  The  Consulate  Kawas  unscrupulously 
cleared  the  way  as  we  passed  through  the  bazaar,  and  the 
people,  who  were  seated  generally,  got  upon  their  legs  as  we 
approached :  the  beggars  and  children  were  shoved  out  of  the 
way  without  ceremony.  Whenever  we  came  to  a  sentry  on 
guard,  he  presented  arms ;  and  I  must  confess,  always  think- 
ing of  my  dirty  state,  I  felt  ashamed  at  returning  the  salute. 
As  we  did  not  find  the  gentleman  at  home  whom  we  wanted 


36o  HILLAH-^BABEL. 

to  see,  I  propoeed  we  should  look  at  the  town ;  and  when  le 
had  done  that^  we  started  on  a  two-mile  walk  ontside  the 
place  to  look  at  a  saint's  tomb.  The  son  was  roastinglj  hot, 
and  .  I  was  almost  stewed.  As  we  returned  from  the  tomb, 
which  was  not  worth  visiting,  we  met  a  fiineraL  The  corpse 
was  without  a  coffin,  and  almost  naked,  carried  on  a  stretd^r 
by  four  Persians,  and  followed  by  about  twenty  more.  They 
had  an  eight  hours'  walk  before  them  before  reaching  the 
Persian  cemetery.  ^^  Heavens  I "  I  exclaimed,  when  this  latter 
fact  came  to  my  knowledge,  ^^  can  these  people  hold  out  under 
such  a  sun  for  eight  hours  ?  Impossible !  by  that  time  the 
corpse  will  be  roasted  outright ;  fit  to  be  eaten,  if  the  bearen 
have  a  taste  that  way ! " 

28M,  Hillah. — This  morning  at  four  o'clock  I  was  in  the 
saddle  on  the  way  to  Birs  Nimroud,  situated  about  six  miles 
from  Hillah,  on  the  west  side  of  the  Euphrates.  The  momin; 
was  delightful ;  the  horses,  as  I  think  horses  always  do  when 
on  the  road  early,  stepped  out  briskly.  We  had  to  mike  s 
considerable  detour  on  account  of  the  waters  of  the  Euphiatei 
covering  a  deal  of  the  plain  on  the  western  side  of  Bin 
Nimroud,  and  yet  we  reached  that  remarkable  ruin  at  5.90, 
very  soon  after  the  sun  had  got  above  the  horizon.  And 
what  a  ruin  it  is !  One  is  inclined  to  exclaim,  on  first  sedog 
it,  "  If  there  ever  was  a  Tower  of  Babel,  this  must  be  it ; "  « 
much  on  account  of  the  enormous  mass  of  brickwork  as  the 
strong  evidence  there  is  that  it  has  been  destroyed  by  the 
lightning  of  heaven ;  for  round  about  the  summit  there  lie 
some  fifty  enormous  fragments  torn  from  the  building,  the 
surface  of  them,  and  very  likely  the  interior  also,  calcined, 
vitrified,  turned  to  glass  in  fact,  weighing  probably  a  thoa- 
sand  tons.  But  these  fifty  fragments  of  massive  brickwork 
may  but  scantily  represent  the  buried  fragments,  for  they 
crop  up  above  the  surface  in  many  places  close  at  hand. 
The  ruin  is  of  kiln-burnt  bricks,  13  inches  square  and 
3  inches  thick :  the  joints  of  the  courses  are  so  dose 
that  it  is  occasionally  hard  to  detect  the  thin  layer  of  mortar 
which  joins  them  together,  and  so  firmly  in  most  cases  that 
they  cannot  be  severed  without  breaking  the  bricks.  A  layer 
of  reeds,  nevertheless,  was  placed  between  the  courses,  a« 
clearly  appears  after  a  very  slight  examination,  and  some 


BIRS  NIMROUD.  361 

of  the  courses  are  united  by  a  layer  of  bitumen.  The  whole 
min  as  it  stands  now,  is  about  235  feet  in  height  above  the 
▼alley,  and  the  bare  piece  of  brickwork  on  the  summit 
measures  35  feet  in  height  and  about  28  in  thickness. 
There  are  numerous  air-holes  6  inches  by  8  running  all 
through  this  piece  of  bare  brickwork,  in  one  of  which,  some 
10  feet  above  the  base  of  the  summit,  I  detected  a  pigeon  quietly 
Bitting  upon  her  nest. 

From  the  summit  of  Birs  Nimroud  is  seen  in  the  distance 
the  tomb  of  the  Prophet  Ezekiel,  to  which  all  the  Jews  in 
this  neighbourhood  (indeed,  they  come  also,  1  am  told,  from 
far  and  near)  make  an  annual  pilgrimage.  A  couple  of 
Arab  villages,  huts  of  reeds  and  mats,  are  close  to  Birs 
Nimroud ;  the  inhabitants  were  busy,  as  we  passed,  drawing 
water  from  the  Euphrates  for  irrigating  their  very  limited 
extent  of  cultivated  land.  The  three  modern  authorities  on 
Babylon  and  the  neighbouring  ruins  are  Rich,  Porter,  and 
Layard :  neither  of  them  hardly  hazards  a  guess  as  to  what 
sort  of  original  structure  is  now  represented  by  Birs  Nimroud. 
The  ruins  of  Babylon  consist  of  mounds  of  earth,  formed  by 
the  decomposition  of  buildings,  channeled  and  furrowed  by 
the  vreather,  and  the  surface  of  them  strewed  by  pieces  of 
brick,  bitumen,  and  pottery ;  the  mound  of  Amran,  1100 
yards  long  and  800  broad ;  the  Easr,  nearly  square,  700  yards : 
this  last  mound  is  called  Babel,  sometimes  Mugilibe. 

May  \8ty  Bagdad. — ^At  3  p.m.  we  left  Hillah,  and  pro- 
ceeded to  the  ruins  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  river  for  a 
second  investigation,  on  our  way  to  Bagdad.  About  four 
miles  from  Hillah  we  came  to  the  first  mound,  the  Mugilibe 
of  the  Arabs,  and  the  Easr  of  Bach.  On  this  mound  there 
is  a  huge  mass  of  brickwork  standing  above  ground.  The 
bricks  here  are  well  made,  and  the  courses  laid  with  beautiful 
accuracy,  cemented  together  with  the  thinnest  of  layers  of 
mortar.  For  centuries  the  Arabs  have  been  employed  in 
extracting  bricks  from  this  ruin,  which  still  contains  sufficient 
for  the  building  of  many  Hillahs,  if  they  could  be  only  got 
apart.  Fragments  of  alabaster  vessels,  fine  earthenware, 
marble,  and  varnished  tiles  abound  in  all  the  excavations  in 
this  mound.  Close  to  the  mass  of  brickwork  stands  the 
famous  tree,  or  what  remains  of  it — for  it  is  dead  now — ^which 


362  BABYLON— RETURN  TO  BAGDAD. 

the  natiyes  call  Athele,  and  believe  it  to  haye  been  flonrigk* 
ing  in  ancient  Babylon,  from  the  destruction  of  which,  thej 
say,  God  preserved  it,  that  it  might  afford  Ali  a  conyenieot 
place  to  tie  up  his  horse  after  the  battle  of  Hillah ;  so  biji 
Rich.  It  was  green  when  Rich  saw  it  in  1811,  bat  is  nov 
dead,  part  of  the  trunk  and  one  branch  only  remaining. 
After  taking  another  look  at  the  lion,  we  went  on  to  the 
large  mound,  a  mile  distant,  called  by  the  Arabs  BabeL  On 
examining  the  two  circular  holes,  of  about  a  yard  in  diameter, 
I  had  noticed  on  my  first  visit  to  the  mound,  I  was  tdd  bf 
a  man  who  ha3  been  many  years  at  work  there  extracting 
bricks,  that  a  number  of  these  tubes,  about  four  feet  deep, 
placed  one  upon  another,  at  one  time  reached  up  to  the 
surface  of  the  mound,  and  were  in  fact  the  lining  of  a  wdl, 
no  doubt  fixed  in  brickwork,  but  they  had  been  extracted 
down  to  the  depth  at  which  they  now  existed,  broken  19  and 
burnt  for  lime.  Some  three  or  four  broken  earthen  jiif 
embedded  in  earth  in  one  of  the  excavations,  and  eome 
charred  wood,  were  almost  the  only  matters  yisible  in  this 
great  mound.  We  spent  a  couple  of  hours  groping  among 
the  ruins,  and  then  made  a  fresh  start  for  Bagdad.  Hut 
evening  we  stopped  at  Khan  Huswa,  a  poor  place,  and  veiy 
dirty ;  all  we  could  find  to  buy  for  our  dinner  (there  were 
five  of  us)  in  the  miserable  viUage  attached  to  this  khan 
were  two  very  young  chickens,  each  about  a  good  mouthfisl; 
no  eggs,  no  milk,  no  anything.  During  this  trip  &om 
Bagdad  to  the  ruins,  I  have  lived  principally  upon  ^^ 
kayman  (clotted  cream),  tea,  and  rusks.  The  messes  from 
the  bazaar  at  Hillah  were  really  nasty,  and  always  foil  of 
garlic ;  I  could  not  stomach  them.  Notwithstanding  scant 
fare^  and  more  than  the  usual  quantity  of  dirt,  at  Khan  Huswa, 
I  slept  soundly  in  the  niche  allotted  to  me,  and  was  in  the 
saddle  at  2  a.m.,  and  at  11  a.m.  I  reached  Colonel  Herbert^s 
comfortable  home. 

2d. — At  3  A.M.  I  started  to  visit  the  ruin  called  Akarkouff, 
distant  from  Bagdad,  as  the  crow  flies,  perhaps  seyen  miles. 
We  were  four  hours  in  reaching  it,  in  consequence  of  delay 
experienced  getting  across  sheets  of  water  which  obstructed 
the  road,  coming  from  the  overflowing  of  a  canal  firom  the 
Euphrates.    At  one  ford  the  water  just  reached  the  backfl  of 


AKARKOUFF— SAND-STORMS.  363 

oar  horses,  and  over  one  sheet  we  were  obliged  to  make  nse 
of  a  straw  boat  to  cross  it.  On  returning,  in  crossing  the 
deepest  ford,  we  entered  the  water  with  a  drove  of  donkeys, 
two  of  which  got  drowned  before  they  conld  reach  the  oppo- 
site shore. 

From  the  sommit  of  a  gently  sloping  mound  of  rubbish, 
etrewed  with  broken  bricks  and  pottery,  rises  a  solidly-built 
mass  of  sun-burnt,  or  rather  sun-dried,  bricks,  to  the  height 
of  about  100  feet,  and,  as  near  as  I  could  roughly  measure,  of 
about  250  feet  in  circumference  at  its  rugged  base.  These 
sun-dried  bricks  are  a  foot  square,  and  somewhat  less  than 
three  inches  thick.  Projecting  from  the  courses  (every 
twelfth  or  fifteenth  course)  is  a  layer  of  reeds,  which  is 
seen  in  the  whole  circumference  of  this  enormous  pile  of 
brickwork,  perforated  also  by  holes  through  and  through 
perhaps  six  inches  square.  The  reeds  look  quite  fresh,  and 
may  be  easily  drawn  out  from  between,  the  bricks  to  the  length 
of  a  foot  or  more.  No  doubt  the  whole  mound,  if  dug  into, 
would  be  found  to  be  a  mass  of  brickwork,  the  visible  pro- 
jecting pieces  on  the  summit  of  the  mound  of  debris  being 
nothing  more  than  the  centre  of  a  very  much  larger  structure. 
There  is  no  history  attached  to  this  ruin ;  in  fact,  no  one 
has  hardly  attempted  to  guess  its  origin  or  its  use.  It  is 
evidently  of  great  antiquity.  The  layers  of  brick  are  cemented 
together  by  a  coating  of  slime,  but  what  good  the  layers  of 
reeds  do  it  is  difficult  to  conjecture,  for  they  do  not  at  all 
adhere  to  the  layers  of  bricks  between  which  they  have  been 
placed.  It  is  getting  warm  now^  the  thermometer  standing 
in  my  room  at  86^ 

3<i — Sand-storms  would  seem  to  be  frequent ;  yesterday 
we  experienced  one  of  the  worst  that  has  been  known  here 
for  years  ;  it  came  on  about  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  and 
lasted  for  a  couple  of  hours.  The  fine  dust,  driven  along  by 
a  gale  of  wind,  found  its  way  into  the  house  through  every 
crevice,  and  brought  darkness  along  with  it.  It  is  the  hot 
south  wind  that  brings  these  storms.  The  river  here  must 
be  about  200  feet  above  the  sea,  or  about  2000  feet  below  its 
surface  at  Diarbekir. 

7^^. — ^The  disease  of  the  Aleppo  button,  called  here  the 
date-mark,  is  very  general  in  Bagdad.     Mrs  H.'s  youngest 


I 


364  ALEPPO  BUTTON. 

child,  a  little  girl  two  and  a  half  years  old,  is  just  recoTering 
from  an  attack  of  it  She  had  twenty-seven  buttons  on  ha 
face,  forehead,  and  neck,  and  can  hardly  escape  being  markei 
Dr  Colville,  of  this  place,  tells  me  that  he  has  had  reeoone 
to  vaccination  for  the  Aleppo  button,  and  so  far  successfnUj, 
the  disease  never  having  attacked  those  whom  he  had  tbo* 
cinated ;  but  his  experience  in  the  matter  is  yet  very  limited. 
Barley-reaping  is  very  general  here  now. 


CHAPTER  XVL 

Lmt6  tn  steamer— Ciir  of  Siludft—Arcli  of  Ciedplion— Tigris  and  Euphrates  Steam 
Natigatioii  Ga — Passengers :  Arabs.  Persians,  and  Jews— Turldsn  GoTemment 
steamers— Alexander's  Sridge— Arao  corpse— Buffalo,  horses,  sheep,  and  goats 
—Oapital  reanired  to  make  860  miles  of  railwaj— Tomb  of  Ezra— Land  Jewish 
pilgnms— WUd  pigs— Bussorah— The  Qarden  of  Eden— Life  and  property  in- 
seeiir»— C7i<y  o/Xon(2o»— PsYof  emjiloySs— Comfort  on  board— ^tAiopia—Befleo- 
tioDs — Too  muoh  comfort— Description  of  Bussorah,  wretched  phice— Date-palms 
—Good  fish— The  saultoun,  Persian  masioal  instrument — Fao,  telegraph  station— 
Biee  and  grain  onltiTmtion — ^Bushire — ^Take  in  cotton  and  wool—  Mimchester  goods 
—Square  wind-towers— Persia  worse  goremed  than  Turkey ;  they  must  fall — 
Rxpoita  and  imports — Curious  fogs — Mount  Gebel  Ginnoh— Bukumarth,  with 
snow- Isle  of  Hormia— Muscat— Intense  heat— The  Imaum's  residence— Bacports 
— Kurraohee,  a  skeleton  dty— Bailway  to  Kotree  on  the  Indus,  opposite 
Hyderabad. 

May  ^hy  on  hoard  the  steamer  '^  City  of  Londan^^  Cowley^ 
nasterj  hound  from  Bagdad  to  Bussorah. — Came  on  board 
this  steamer  last  night  in  a  hifa^  and  at  five  this  morning  we 
started  for  Bnssorab.  At  eight  o'clock  we  passed  a  line  of 
mounds,  belieyed  to  represent  part  of  the  wall  that  once 
Borrouided  the  city  of  Silncia,  and  about  the  same  time  we 
passed  the  Arch  of  Ctesiphon,  the  most  perfect  ruin  of  any 
that  remains  of  that  city.  There  are  numerous  small  mounds 
on  both  sides,  of  the  riyer,  doubtless  marking  the  sites  of 
buildings  of  both  cities.  The  river  is  now  at  the  greatest 
height  to  which  it  is  expected  to  attain  this  season,  and  we 
consequently  move  along  rapidly,  seven  miles  through  the 
water  and  eleven  over  the  ground,  without  any  danger  of 
touching  the  bottom,  for  we  have  no  cargo  on  board,  and 
are  drawing  not  much  over  two  feet  water.  As  the  summer 
advances,  there  will  now  every  day  be  less  water,  and  although 
this  boat  draws  when  laden  only  three  feet,  she  will  frequently 
have  to  discharge  her  cargo  on  the  river  banks  in  order  to  get 
over  the  shallows  she  will  have  to  encounter  in  her  trips 
between  Bussorah  and  Bagdad ;  and  I  am  told  the  Euphrates, 
running  parallel  with  the  Tigris,  o£fers  still  greater  difficulties 
to  navigation.    The  river  Tigris  must  have  very  much  changed 


366  BAGDAD  TO  BUSSORAH. 

its  course ;  for  here,  opposite  Ctesiphon,  when  tbe  river  iB 
low,  the  ruins  of  buildings  crop  up  almost,  if  not  quite,  above 
its  surface.  The  banks  are  ten  to  twelve  feet  high  all  along, 
and  are  covered,  where  we  now  are,  with  stunted  treea  aod 
brushwood. 

This  steamer  belongs  to  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  Steam 
Navigation  Company,  represented  at  Bagdad  by  Mesm 
Stephen  Lynch  &  Co. ;  she  is  of  iron  (paddle),  and  about 
120  feet  long,  engines  seventy  horse-power.  She  draws  whei 
loaded  three  feet  water.  In  her  trip  from  Bagdad  to  Bm- 
sorah  and  back  she  consumes  about  forty-one  tons  of  ooal, 
which  costs  at  Bussorah  from  fifty  to  sixty  shillings  a  ton, 
or  about  five  tons  a  day.  All  told,  we  have  now  on  board 
120  passengers,  nearly  all  deck  passengers,  Arabs,  Persians, 
and  Jews — these  last  going  on  a  pilgrimage  to  the  tomb  of 
the  Prophet  Ezra.  The  company  have  also  another  steamer, 
somewhat  larger  than  the  City  of  London.  The  postal  sub- 
sidy for  carrying  the  mails  twice  a  month  between  Bagdad 
and  Bussorah  is  £2000  per  annum.  Besides  these  two 
steamers,  there  are  five  others  belonging  to  the  Toridsli 
Government  that  run  between  Bagdad  and  Bussorah;  and 
occasionally,  when  the  river  is  much  swollen,  the  smaller 
Government  boats  (sometimes  twice  in  the  season)  make  a 
trip  on  the  Euphrates  up  as  far  as  Meskanah,  some  120 
miles  below  Aleppo ;  but  these  trips  are  effected  with  difficulty, 
and  usually  with  much  delay.  Day  cloudy ;  thermometer  in 
my  cabin  86°. 

^th. — A  strong  southerly  wind  and  cloudy  weather,  very 
close  to-day.  Since  leaving  Bagdad  the  river  has  widened 
in  many  places  to  half  a  mile  or  more,  but  now  it  has 
narrowed  again  to  a  couple  of  hundred  yards ;  cultivation 
here  and  there,  but  for  the  most  part  the  banks  are  oo?ered 
with  brushwood.  Passed  a  mound  to-day  on  the  western 
bank,  opposite  to  which,  at  low  water,  the  ruins  of  Alexander's 
Bridge  may  be  seen  in  the  water.  Landed  a  few  passengen 
at  Skerkh  Saad,  where  some  Arab  tents  were  pitched,  and 
close  down  to  the  river  a  corpse  had  been  brought  to  be 
washed,  and  alongside  of  it  was  sitting  a  woman,  a  relation 
of  the  deceased,  doing  duty,  naked,  according  to  Arab 
fashion. 


DISTANCE— LONDON  TO  KURRACHEE.        367 

At  noon  passed  the  Comet  at  anchor,  bound  upwards.  She 
had  to  anchor  in  consequence  of  the  strong  southerly  wind. 
At  3  A.1C  stopped  for  a  couple  of  hours  to  coal.  Got  aground 
bo-day  for  the  first  time,  driven  by  the  wind  against  the 
bank,  but  only  for  a  few  minutes.  A  sprinkling  of  bu£falo, 
boraes,  sheep,  and  goats  to  be  seen  on  both  sides  of  the 
rirer.     Thermometer  in  my  cabin  87^ 

My  aneroid  makes  the  Tigris  to  be  above  the  Mediterranean 
it  Diarbekir,  2200  feet ;  Jezireh,  1700  feet ;  Mosul,  800  feet ; 
Bagdad,  200  feet 

Taking  all  the  twists  and  turns  of  the  Tigris^  the  distance 
from  Diarbekir  to  Bagdad  is  about  700  miles,  or,  as  the 
erow  flies,  about  440  miles. 

Distance  from  London  to  Brindisi,    .  .  .  1504  miles. 

„  Brindisi  to  Silucia,     .  .  .  900     „ 

„  Silucia  to  Bussorah,   .  .  .  850     „ 

BiiBsoiah  to  Kunachee,  .  .  1190     ,, 


» 


« 


London  to  Eurrachee,        .        .    4444     „ 


From  London  to  Bombay  vi/i  Suez,  5247  miles.  Capital 
tequired  to  make  the  850  miles  railway,  about  ten  millions 
sterling. 

We  stopped  about  ten  o'clock  last  night  to  land  some 
passengers,  and  to  take  in  four  tons  coal  at  one  of  the  sta- 
tions ;  and  as  the  night  was  dark,  no  stars  to  guide  us  in 
our  course,  we  remained  at  anchor  until  4.30  this  morning. 
The  banks  of  the  river  have  been  for  some  time  very  low, 
not  above  a  foot  or  two  above  the  water  ;  and  on  the  left,  or 
eastern  side,  the  water  flows  over,  and  it  is  marshy  for  a 
great  extent  Nevertheless,  we  have  passed  many  Arab 
encampments,  and  large  herds  of  fine  bufialo,  with  some 
very  good-looking  fields  of  barley.  The  greater  part  of  the 
Arabs  whom  we  see  now  are  migratory,  and  come  to  the 
river-side  with  their  flocks  and  herds  only  during  summer. 
They  belong  to  the  Maidan  tribe,  and  extend  from  Bagdad 
to  Bussorah.  The  river  has  narrowed  very  much  within  the 
la^t  twenty-four  hours,  and  ranges  now  from  60  to  200 
yards. 

At  9.30  A.M.  we  stopped  at  the  Tomb  of  Ezra,  and  landed 
some  twenty-five  Jewish  pilgrims,   come  to  perform  their 


368  TOMB  OFEZRA—MAGHJL. 

devotions  to  the  prophet.  I  landed  and  visited  the  tondk 
Therie  is  a  sort  of  khan  attached  to  it  for  the  accommodation 
of  pilgrims,  from  the  courtyard  of  which  you  pass  mto  \ 
large  anteroom,  and  thence  into  an  apartment  in  the  middle 
of  which  is  the  tomb  of  the  prophet — an  oblong  stractaie  of 
Bun-dried  bricks  (so  far  as  I  could  see),  cased  in  wood  and 
enveloped  in  a  chintz  covering,  measuring  about  twelve  tNt 
by  seven,  and  at  the  sides  about  five  feet  high.  The  room 
is  forty  feet  by  twenty-five,  and  thirty  feet  high,  dimly 
lighted  by  four  windows  very  high  up  in  the  walL  All 
around,  for  about  six  feet  from  the  floor,  the  walls  are  covered 
with  coloured  tiles,  and  above  that  the  rest  of  the  wall, « 
well  as  the  arched  roof,  are  covered  with  paint  and  Hebrew 
inscriptions.  This  tomb  is  held  in  high  honour*^  both  bj 
the  Jew  and  the  Mahometan,  and  the  Jews  particolarlj 
at  this  season  flock  to  it  in  great  numbers  from  Bagdad. 
I  know  not,  I  am  sure,  upon  what  authority  it  is  called  the 
Tomb  of  Ezra,  but  nobody  seems  to  dispute  its  claim  to  be 
so  called.  Wild  pigs  plentiful  on  the  banks  ;  one,  a  sow, 
with  two  young  ones,  after  she  had  been  fired  at,  charged 
the  steamer  with  the  bristles  on  her  back  erect.  About  one 
o'clock  we  met  the  Digilah  on  her  way  to  Bagdad  from 
Bussorah.  Took  from  her  a  gentleman  who  had  embarked 
for  a  sail  on  the  Tigris. 

Wtk^  Maghii — We  reached  this  place,  where  Messrs 
Lynch  have  an  establishment  for  receiving  cargo,  and  a  dock 
(such  as  it  is)  for  doing  small  repairs  to  their  steamers, 
at  nine  o'clock  last  evening.  We  go  on  to  Bussorah  to- 
morrow morning,  distant  by  water  five  miles.  The  conflaenoe 
of  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris  takes  place  just  forty  miles 
higher  up  the  river,  and  then  takes  the  name  of  Shat  el 
Arab.  Bussorah  is  situated  on  or  near  to  the  right  bank 
of  the  river,  forty-five  miles  below  where  the  Shat  el  Arab 
commences,  and  seventy-five  miles  above  where  it  enters  the 
Persian  Gulf.  Here,  at  Maghii,  the  Shat  el  Arab  is  fully • 
mile  wide.  The  Garden  of  Eden  is  located  at  the  junction 
of  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris  (Kornah).  The  three  principal 
places  passed  in  coming  from  Bagdad  are  Kub,  Dufns,  and 
Ezra  6  Tomb.  Latitude  of  Bussorah,  30°  29'  N. ;  longitude, 
47^  34'  E.     Both    sides   of   the   Shat  el  Arab,  from  its 


BUSSORAH^RIVER  STEAMERS— ETHIOPIA,   369 

commencement  all  the  wajto  Bnssorah,  with  bat  slight  in- 
terval, are  thickly  studded  with  the  date-palm,  presenting 
towards  autumn,  when  ^the  fruit  is  ripe,  a  gorgeous  appear- 
aDce.  Thermometer  in  my  cabin  at  2  p.m.,  90®.  They  tell 
me  that  life  in  Bussorah  just  now  is  very  insecure ;  murders 
take  place  in  the  streets  in  broad  day,  and  no  attempt  is 
made  by  the  authorities  to  secure  the  delinquents.  A 
Bagdad  woman,  who  arrived  here  yesterday  by  the  mail- 
steamer  from  Bombay,  left  us  this  morning,  on  the  13th,  on 
a  visit  to  Bussorah  (the  town  lies  some  three  or  four  miles 
up  a  creek,  above  where  vessels  are  at  anchor).  She  wore 
heavy  silver  anklets,  weighing  about  four  pounds,  and  before 
leaving  for  the  town,  she  put  her  legs  into  a  vice,  and  the 
blacksmith,  after  considerable  labour,  managed  to  unfasten 
them  for  her,  that  she  might  leave  them  on  board,  and  not 
nm  the  risk  of  being  knocked  down  and  robbed  of  them 
in  the  streets,  which  she  feared  might  happen.  Such  is 
Bussorah  just  now.  A  regular  tide  is  felt  some  eighty  miles 
above  Bussorah. 

These  river  steamers  are  well  managed ;  there  are  only 
two  of  them,  and  they  earn  enough  to  pay  15  per  cent, 
annually  to  the  shareholders.  This  steamer,  the  City  of 
London  J  is  185  feet  long ;  draws  (light)  about  thirty  inches  of 
water,  and  when  laden  forty-two  inches :  she  is  of  iron,  sent 
out  firom  home,  and  put  together  here.  She  can  carry  about 
110  tons  weight  of  cargo,  the  freight  on  which  hence  to 
Bagdad  is  about  47s.  6d.  the  ton.  The  trip  up  and  down 
occupies  some  fourteen  days.  The  crew  consists  of  captain, 
mate,  clerk,  first  and  second  engineers,  eleven  sailors,  and 
seven  firemen,  flngines  seventy  horse-power ;  speed,  seven 
knots ;  consumption  of  coal,  forty  tons  the  trip,  costing  at 
Bussorah  50s.  the  ton.  Engineers  and  first  officer's  wages 
about  £15  to  £20  a  month.  The  captain  gets  about  £400 
a  year. 

15^^,  on  board  the  "  EthiopiaJ*^ — I  have  been  on  board  this 
steamer  since  the  day  before  yesterday,  when  the  City  of 
London  started  on  her  return  voyage  to  Bagdad.  What  a 
comfort  it  is,  after  one  has  been  roughing  it  in  travelling  for 
weeks,  sleeping  on  the  ground  in  the  open,  or,  if  under  cover, 
sharing  that  cover  with  the  animals  of  your  caravan,  never 

2a 


370        ETHIOPIA— BRITISH  INDIA  COMPANY, 

having  a  chance  of  undressing,  Bnd  never  doing  mndk 
even  in  the  way  of  washing,  over  bad  roads^  and  perhaps  in 
bad  weather,  and  with  a  scanty  dinner,  or  no  dinner  at  aO, 
after  your  day's  work  is  finished,  and,  what  \a  sometinM 
worse  than  all,  with  the  certainty  of  finding  dirt  to  the  ejci 
whenever  and  wherever  you  may  have  to  stop ; — I  say,  what  t 
comfort  it  is  to  find  yourself  on  board  an  EngliBh  passenger 
steamer  such  as  the  Ethiopia^  scrupulously  dean  every  uMJi 
of  her,  and  where  you  have  the  run  of  a  first-rate  table,  tod 
a  large  comfortable  cabin  to  yourself,  with  an  acconmiodatisg 
gentlemanly  captain  in  command,  and  a  host  of  servanti  to 
attend  to  your  wants  I  None  but  those  who  have  experienced 
the  change  know  how  properly  to  appreciate  it.  There  is  • 
feeling  of  safety,  too,  on  board  these  steamers,  which  mi^ 
also  count  for  something,  though  I  am  not  sure  it  compensates 
for  the  loss  of  that  excitement  which  one  always  enjoys,  more 
or  less,  when  travelling  in  the  desert,  with  a  good  retolTer 
in  his  belt,  and  the  certainty  that  he  may  at  any  moment^ 
perhaps  when  least  expected,  be  called  upon  to  tise  it  Here^ 
on  board  this  boat,  I  am  the  only  cabin  passenger ;  she  is 
nearly  1200  tons,  belonging  to  the  British  India  Com- 
pany, with  accommodation  for  sixty  first-class  passengen; 
and  I  am  alone  here,  and  probably  may  remain  so  all  the 
way  to  Kurrachee.  You  may  have  your  hair  cut,  be  shaved 
if  you  need  it ;  have  your  corns,  your  finger  and  toe  nails,  aD 
put  in  order ;  for  there  is  a  barber  on  board  equal  to  do  all 
this,  and  who  earns  by  operating  on  the  officers  and  passengeni 
and  occasionally  on  our  countrymen  living  in  the  oui-<^ 
the-way  parts  at  which  the  steamer  calls,  something  like  a 
hundred  rupees  a  month,  more  than  three  times  the  wages  of 
a  lascar.  Then  you  may  have  your  clothes  washed  on  boaid, 
as  I  have  had  mine  already,  and  mended  if  need  be.  Infitft, 
you  have  too  much  comfort  on  board  this  sort  of  steamer;  jot 
feel  the  want  of  excitement.  It  does  well  enough,  however, 
for  a  little  while.  The  sort  of  life  you  lead  here  is  mainlj 
contemplative,  and  it  is  doubtless  good  for  one  to' be  so 
situated  at  times.  The  past,  present,  and  future  stand  a 
chance  here  of  being  coolly,  and  perhaps  profitably,  considered; 
whereas,  in  the  tumult  of  busy  life,  the  present  only  is  apt  to 
absorb  all  your  attention. 


VISIT  TO  THE  TOWN  OF  BUSSORAH.         371 

Testerdaj,  with  Captain  Sanders^  I  paid  a  visit  to  the 
town  of  Bnssorah,  which  we  reached  by  proceeding  np  a  creek 
reiy  like  a  ditch,  running  np  for  about  three  miles  from 
the  shore  off  which  we  are  anchored.  It  took  ns,  in  a  helium^ 
or  native  boat,  about  half  an  hour  before  we  reached  the 
bazaar,  where  we  got  out  and  walked  through  the  town. 
Thej  say  it  contains  25,000  inhabitants,  for  the  most  part 
Arabs.  The  town  is  built  wholly  of  mud,  a  most  tumble- 
down place  ;  crumbling  walls  and  houses  in  ruins  meet  one  at 
e?ei7  torn  after  emerging  from  the  bazaar,  which  is  itself 
a  double  row  of  wretched  shops.  The  streets  are  entirely 
unpared,  and  uneven  in  the  extreme ;  so  much  so^  that  you 
need  to  keep  a  sharp  look-out  as  you  walk  along,  that  you 
don't  come  down  on  your  nose.  We  paid  a  visit  to  the  Vice- 
Consnl,  and  to  the  consignees  of  the  mail-steamer ;  and  what 
wretched  places  both  of  them  live  in  I  The  streets  are  every- 
where narrow,  with  a  blank  and  frequently  broken-down 
dead  wall  on  both  sides,  without  the  semblance  of  a  window 
opening  into  them ;  the  shops,  such  as  they  are,  being  all 
together,  and  forming  what  is  called  the  bazaar,  the  in- 
variable arrangement  in  Eastern  towns.  When  we  returned 
to  the  ship,  the  tide  was  out,  and  the  creek,  as  it  is  called, 
was  then  literally  and  truly  a  ditch,  for  the  most  part  some 
five  to  ten  yards  wide,  with  a  high  mud  bank  on  each  side, 
lined,  however,  with  thick  plantations  of  the  date-palm.  All 
the  country  is  of  course  alluvial,  as  flat  as  the  palm  of  your  hand, 
no  natural  hunmiock  as  big  as  your  fist  anywhere  between 
Bagdad  and  Bussorah.  We  get  a  capital  fish  in  this  river, 
from  a  foot  to  eighteen  inches  long;  one  of  the  best  fresh- 
water fish  I  have  ever  eaten.  Last  night  I  slept  on  deck, 
for  in  my  cabin,  when  I  retired  to  rest,  the  thermometer 
marked  94^  The  weather  we  are  having  here  now,  they  say, 
is  unusual  for  the  month  of  May;  hot  southerly  winds, 
clondy  occasionally,  with  calms  and  slight  showers  of  rain. 
We  start  to-morrow,  and  I  shall  be  glad  when  we  are  offi 

16^^ — Mr  C.  and  Dr  D.  dined  with  us  yesterday,  and  did 
not  leave  the  ship  until  past  ten  o'clock.  A  Persian,  a 
paasenger  on  board  for  Bushire,  who  has  two  wives  with  him, 
entertained  ns  on  the  quarter-deck  by  performing  on  the 
saultoun,   a  Persian  musical    instrument    of    considerable 


372  PERSIAN  MUSICAL  INSTRUMENT— BUSHIRL 

capacity.     It  is  a  stringed  instrament,  and  is  played  bj 
tapping   tlie  wire  strings  with  two  slight  pieces  of  wooi    \ 
This  instrument,  I  am  told,  is  mentioned  in  the  Bible.   Thk 
morning  at  5.30  we  got   under  way,  and  about  noon  le 
were  o£f  Fao,  a  telegraph  station  at  the  mouth  of  the  Shat 
el  Arab,  where  we  sent  a  boat  on  shore  with  letters,  and 
received  telegraphic  news  from  London  to   10th  inst    Aft 
is  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  where  it  enters  the  Persia 
Gulf,  and  very  soon  after  leaving  it  we  lost  sight  of  boft 
banks,  and  we  are  now  steering,  having  passed  two  bnoyi^ 
a  straight  course  for  Bushire,  a  port  of  Persia  on  the  Persin 
side  of  the  gulf,  whilst  Fao  is  on  the  Arabian  side,  and 
belongs  to   Turkey.      There  is  a  good  deal  of  land  nndv 
cultivation^  rice  and  grain,  on  both  sides  of  the  river,  all  tk 
way  down  after  leaving  Bussorah,  until  you  begin  to  approtck 
Fao,  and  then  the  river  widens  considerably,  and  the  plan- 
tations of  dates  even  disappear.     Large  herds  of  boffidOi 
wallowing  in  the  marshy  land  or  bathing  in  the  river,  which 
they  seem  to  enjoy  very  much,  with  their  noses  just  aboit 
water,  and  nothing  more,  are  constantly  in'sight ;  andontha 
whole,  with  the  date-palms,  fruit-trees,  living  scenery,  vd. 
the  large  establishments  on  the  banks  of  several  powofid 
sheikhs,  the  river  presents  rather  an  interesting  appearance^ 
considering  that  both  banks  of  it  are  but  a  few  feet  in  heighit 
above  its  surface,  and  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach  is  a  perfect 
flat.    Thermometer  in  my  cabin  90°. 

IQth. — We  anchored  off  the  town  of  Bushire,  distant  ahoit 
two  and  a  half  miles,  in  four  fathoms.  A  Dutch  bark,  fioai 
Batavia,  laden  with  sugar,  was  the  only  other  vessel  in  the 
roadstead,  and  was  at  anchor  close  to  us.  We  had  no  sooner 
dropt  anchor  than  a  host  of  boats  laden  with  cotton  and 
wool,  that  had  come  off  from  Bushire  to  wait  our  arriTal, 
pushed  alongside,  and  we  were  soon  hard  at  work  receiving 
cargo ;  but  the  operation  of  weighing  the  bales  on  board  at 
the  gangway,  before  passing  them  into  the  hold,  causes  great 
delay.  These  bales,  if  weighed  on  shore,  might  be  hoiated 
into  the  ship  in  less  than  half  the  time  now  occupied  in 
taking  them  on  board.  We  were  employed  all  day  in  dis- 
charging half-a-dozen  small  boats,  holding  only  a  few  haki 
of  loosely-packed  wool  and  cotton.     All  day  we  had  a  strong 


B  USHIRE— BAZAAR-SERAI,  373 

^nd  pleasant  breeze  blowing  from  N.W.  They  call  this 
Ixeeze  of  N.W.  wind  here  the  Shamal,  and  set  great  store 
^pon  it  at  Bushire  for  keeping  the  town  healthy.  It  com- 
mences usually  about  this  time,  and  lasts  for  about  forty 
^ys.  I  did  not  land  on  the  day  of  our  arrival,  but  yesterday 
I  went  on  shore  in  the  mail-boat,  and  remained  there  six 
ItonrSy  whilst  the  mails  were  being  got  ready  for  embarkation — 
time  quite  sufficient  to  enable  me  to  have  a  good  look  at  the 
towD.  It  is  built  of  a  crumbly  limestone  full  of  shells,  the 
•tones  being  from  one  to  two  feet  long,  and  two  to  four 
inches  thick ;  in  fact,  they  have  more  the  appearance  of  large 
ran-dried  bricks  than  they  have  of  stone,  and  I  should  think 
might  not  be  much  more,  lasting.  They  are  generally,  how- 
•fer,  covered  up  with  a  coating  of  cement,  which  gives  them 
a  very  durable  appearance.  The  streets  of  Bushire  are  narrow, 
and  as  crooked  as  they  can  well  be,  presenting  on  both  sides 
ihe  usual  line  of  dead  wall.  The  bazaar  is  very  limited ;  you 
can  walk  all  through  it  from  end  to  end  in  two  minutes. 
I  saw  little  in  it  but  the  usual  variety  of  condiments  used  by 
these  Easterns  in  cooking,  and  a  fair  sprinkling  of  Manchester 
goods.  To  walk  all  round  the  town  did  not  occupy  me  more 
than  twenty  minutes ;  it  is  built  on  a  neck  of  land,  with  a 
wall  for  defence  on  the  land  side,  although,  so  far  as  I  could 
lee,  it  would  be  of  little  avail  to  keep  out  an  attacking  party 
otherwise  armed  than  with  bows  and  arrows.  The  Serai  is 
a  wretched-looking  place,  and  the  Residency,  though  some- 
what better  kept,  is  more  or  less  upon  a  par  with  it.  The 
rammer  is  now  commencing,  when  the  inhabitants  mount  up 
to  their  birdcages,  built  of  cane  and  matting,  on  the  flat  roofs 
of  their  houses,  and  there  they  remain  during  the  hot  season, 
which  lasts  until  the  end  of  August  In  Bagdad,  on  the 
eontrary,  the  people  are  now  retiring  to  their  cellars  for  the 
rammer,  though  they  sleep  upon  the  roof;  and  at  Diarbekir 
thej  follow  a  happy  medium,  and  remain  during  the  day  in 
their  ordinary  living-rooms,  but  retire  at  night  to  sleep  on 
the  roofs  of  tiie  houses.  At  Bushire  they  have  another  con- 
trivance to  keep  their  houses  cool ;  square  wind-towers,  open 
on  all  sides,  stand  up  to  a  good  height  on  the  flat  roofs  of 
the  larger  houses,  and  carry  a  column  of  cold  air  to  the  rooms 
below,  and  I  have  no  doubt  there  is  a  contrivance  for  shut- 


374  BUSHIRE. 

ting  up  three  sides  out  of  the  four,  so  as  to  make  a  more 
efficient  wind-sail  of  it  Foreign  merchants  have  oountij- 
houses  in  the  neighbourhood,  to  which  they  retire  after  bad- 
ness hours.  The  town  contains  some  fifteen  or  twenty 
thousand  inhabitants,  out  of  which  some  five  hundred  ue 
living  upon  alms,  doled  out  to  them  from  a  fund  collected  in 
India  for  the  relief  of  the  famine.  This  miserable  port  of 
Bushire,  into  which  no  vessel  drawing  more  than  eight  &et 
of  water  can  enter,  all  others  being  obliged  to  remain  in  tlie 
roadstead,  is  the  chief  seaport  of  Persia  I  Since  my  arriiil 
in  and  about  this  gulf,  I  have  heard  a  good  deal  about  Penii, 
and  it  is,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  a  much  worse  gOTemei 
country  even  than  Turkey;  and  were  it  not  that  we  think 
it  politic  to  bolster  it  up  against  what  we  seem  to  consider 
our  natural  Eastern  enemy,  but  which  many  people  consider 
merely  in  the  light  of  a  bugbear — Bussia — it  would  not  be 
long  in  crumbling  to  pieces.  But  do  what  we  will,  the  fate 
.  of  Persia,  as  of  Turkey,  can  only  be  delayed.  The  Grovem- 
ments  of  both  those  countries  must  die  out,  or  be  violently 
overturned,  before  the  lapse  of  many  more  years.  How  cui 
it  be  otherwise  in  countries  bordering  on  powerful  Christiin 
nations,  in  which  one-half  the  whole  population,  the  femile 
part  of  it,  is  of  so  little  account  that  it  is  considered  as  mere 
chattels  ? 

I  visited  at  Bushire  Mr  M^Eenzie  and  the  English  corps 
of  telegraph  clerks,  from  whom  I  learned  there  were  tel^rtnu 
from  London  to  the  13th,  and  that  there  was  a  probalnlity 
the  American  difficulty  would  be  amicably  settled.  CJolond 
Pelly  is  the  Resident  here.  The  mails  were  posted  to  letfe 
at  five,  but  the  Resident's  letters  delayed  it  until  6.30,  and 
the  consequence  was — the  steamer  being  obliged  to  leave  the 
roadstead  during  daylight — that  we  had  a  sail  of  two  honn 
or  more  to  get  on  board  her  in  the  offing.  We  are  now  (noon) 
running  down  the  coast  with  high  hills  in  the  distance,  and 
should  reach  Lingeh,  our  next  port,  at  daylight  to-morrow 
morning.  Latitude  of  Bushire,  29®  I'N. ;  longitude,  5' 5' R 
Exports — cotton,  wool,  hides,  horses,  carpets,  shawls,  tobacco, 
and  otto  of  roses.  Imports — rice,  cotton,  and  woollen  good^ 
sugar,  pepper,  and  spices,  iron,  tin,  lead,  steel,  and  cutleit. 
Thermometer  to-day  90°.  We  reached  Lingeh  at  noon  yesterday 


LINGEH—HM.  GUNBOAT  LYNX.  375 

the  20ih.  I  started  on  shore  at  once  with  the  second  officer 
carrying  the  mails.  Lingeh  is  a  poor  little  place,  built,  like 
fioshire,  of  a  concrete  stone,  sand  and  shells,  which  they  dig 
oat  round  about  the  town.  In  the  immediate  neighbourhood 
of  the  town  there  is  a  good  sprinkling  of  date-palm^  and 
there  are  numerous  wells,  some  twenty-five  to  thirty  feet 
deep,  dug  among  them,  of  which  the  water,  though  abundant 
anongh,  is,  I  believe,  somewhat  brackish.  Lingeh  is  a  dirty 
place,  and  in  walking  about  I  found  the  heat  excessive.  A 
pearl  merchant  whom  I  visited,  and  who  showed  me  a  pearl 
for  which  he  asked  1000  rupees,  gave  jne  a  glass  of  sherbet, 
a  most  grateful  beverage  in  hot  weather.  We  remained  on 
diore  until  5  p.m.,  waiting  at  the  post-office  for  the  mails, 
aud  in  half  an  hour  afterwards  we  were  on  board  and  under 
way  for  Bunder  Abbas,  where  we  are  now  at  anchor,  arriving 
at  7  A.1L  We  found  here  H.M.  gunboat  Lynx^  Keats  com- 
mander, and  a  Dutch  ship  from  Batavia,  and  soon  afterwards 
the  Euphrates  steamer  came  in  from  Bombay,  bound  up  the 
gol£  During  the  night  and  the  next  morning,  before  we 
got  into  Lingeh,  we  experienced  very  thick  fogs,  so  much 
so  that  about  9  a.m.  we  were  close  aboard  the  island  of 
Frdr  before  we  could  see  it ;  and  it  was  most  curious,  for 
in  one  half  minute  from  the  time  of  its  being  thoroughly 
hidden  from  us,  it  was  all  clear  and  bright  close  alongside  of 
OS.  It  was  like  raising  the  drop-scene  at  a  theatre.  We 
hid  previously  seen  the  outline  of  the  island  over  the  batik 
of  dense  white  cloud  which  hid  the  body  of  the  island  from 
08,  and  at  the  moment  the  curtain  of  fog  drew  up,  we  were 
steering  right  for  it,  we  ourselves  being  entirely  free  from 
fog.  The  transition  was  the  quickest  thing  of  the  sort  I  or 
any  officer  on  board  the  ship  had  seen.  I  was  myself  stand- 
ing at  the  time  leaning  over  the  rail  at  the  front  part  of  the 
poop-deck  with  the  captain  and  a  passenger,  all  three  of  us 
peering  into  the  fog-bank  for  the  island,  and  wondering  what 
had  become  of  it,  so  close  had  it  appeared  to  be  to  us  when 
we  last  saw  the  outline  fringing  the  fog-bank  an  hour  before. 
Whilst  thus  employed,  I  looked  aft  for  one  instant  to  see  if 
we  had  passed  it,  and  on  turning  back  again,  lo  and  behold ! 
there  it  was,  standing  up  as  clear  as  a  hill,  almost  right 
under  our  bows.     The  transformation  was  so  rapid,  from  a 


376         BUNDER  ABBAS— HORMIZ-^MUSCAT. 

bank  of  white  fog  to  the  island  itself,  that  it  was  more  like 
a  dissolving-view  scene  than  anything  else,  only  that  it  us 
perhaps  more  rapidly  executed. 

I  went  on  shore  for  an  hoar.  Bander  Abbas  is  a  poor 
place,  with  some  1500  to  2000  inhabitants :  only  one  Euro- 
pean here  that  I  have  heard  of,  and  he  is  leaving  to-4aj, 
sick,  by  the  Euphrates.  They  tell  me  the  place  is  very  un- 
healthy, notwithstanding  that  every  house  seems  to  be  fQ> 
nished  with  an  air-tower  on  the  flat  roof  for  sending  down  t 
column  of  cool  air  into  the  rooms  beneath.  There  is  no 
Persian  town  of  any  importance  inland  from  Bunder  Abbii 
nearer  than  400  miles.  Behiud  the  town,  at  a  distance  of 
fifteen  miles,  is  seen  the  picturesque  mountain  of  Gebel 
Ginnoh,  7690  feet  high;  and  beyond  that  again  is  seen  in 
clear  weather  the  mountain  of  Bukumarth,  10,660  feet  high, 
its  crown  covered  with  enow.  Opposite  to  Bunder  Abbas  ii 
the  island  of  Hormiz,  once  famous  as  the  stopping-place  of 
all  ships  trading  in  the  gulf  between  the  East  and  the  West, 
now  inhabited  by  some  400  fishermen.  The  Portuguese  htTe 
left  upon  this  island  marks  of  their  occupation  in  awell-bmlt 
fortress  of  blue  stone.  Thermometer  90^  The  submarine 
telegraph  stations  in  the  Persian  Gulf  are  Fao,  Boshiie, 
Hengam,  Jask,  Guarder,  and  Kurrachee. 

22rf. — We  had  to  wait  yesterday  at  Bunder  Abbas  for 
the  mails  until  10  p.m.,  and  at  that  hour  both  we  and  the 
Euphrates  got  under  way:  we  for  Muscat,  and  she  bound 
up  the  gulf.  We  raced  for  half  an  hour,  but  the  EuphtnH^ 
is  no  match  for  the  Ethiopia.  Fine  weather  and  smooth 
water  ever  since  we  left  Bussorah.  The  heat  increases,  and 
in  my  cabin  at  this  moment  the  thermometer  stands  at  9r. 

24M. — We  anchored  at  Muscat,  on  the  coast  of  Arabia, 
yesterday  at  8  a.m.,  and  after  breakfast  went  on  shore  and 
visited  the  ship's  agent,  whom  we  found  down  with  dysentery; 
and,  nevertheless,  he  refused  to  leave  his  post  and  come  on 
board  the  Ethiopia^  although  told  by  the  doctor  that  he 
would  die  if  he  did  not  leave  Muscat.  The  heat  was  intense 
on  shore,  105°,  they  said,  in  the  shade.  Bought  some  otto  of 
roses,  and  a  piece  of  cotton  cloth  made  from  brown  cotton, 
and  a  piece  of  stuff  for  ladies'  bands.  Lunched  with  Major 
and  Mrs  Boss.      Returned  to  the  ship  at  five,  and  at  10  yX 


MUSCAT— THE  RESIDENCY— A  TAME  LION.    377 

we  were  again  en  route :  it  took  us  until  that  hour  to  embark 
eighty  tons  coal.  The  Lynx  gunboat  came  into  port  an 
hour  after  us,  and  left  again  before  us.  There  were  some 
fiye-and-tweuty  ships  in  Muscat;  three  or  four  with  rice 
from  Calcutta,  and  almost  all  the  others  laid  up  until  the 
south-west  monsoon  had  passed  over,  when  they  would  again 
commence  running  between  Muscat  and  Bombay.  The  port 
of  Muscat  is  a  cove  in  the  shape  of  a  horse-shoe,  three  sides 
formed  of  very  rugged  cinder  or  clinker  like  serpentine  hills, 
with  deep  water  close  to,  unless  at  the  landing-place,  where 
there  is  a  flat  to  some  extent,  upon  which  the  town  stands, 
many  parts  of  which  are  in  ruins.  The  bazaar  is  large,  but 
very  poor  and  miserable.  The  Residency  seems  a  comfortable 
house,  and  perhaps  the  Imaum's  may  be  so  too.  In  the  court- 
yard of  the  latter  I  saw  a  tame,  maneless  lion,  loose,  walking 
about.  The  respectable  houses  of  Muscat  may  be  counted 
upon  your  fingers.  Over  the  door  of  the  customhouse,  a 
Portuguese  building,  is  the  date  1647.  There  are  also  three 
or  four  forts  built  by  the  Portuguese,  to  all  appearance  in  a 
good  state  of  repair. 

24tA, — Muscat,  another  small  town  close  by,  and  Muthrah, 
also  close  alongside,  the  three  together  contain,  more  or  less, 
some  20,000  inhabitants.  They  say  the  surrounding  hills  are 
not  volcanic ;  nevertheless,  they  have  all  the  appearance  of 
being  so.  There  is  not  a  bit  of  anything  green  about  them, 
though  Muscat  is  well  supplied  with  fruit,  which  all  comes 
from  a  distance,  some  two  or  three  days  inland,  and  it  is 
tolerably  well  supplied  with  vegetables  also.  It  exports  dates, 
ivory,  gum,  hides,  cotton ;  and  there  is  wheat  sufficient  for 
its  own  consumption  grown  in  the  neighbourhood.  Lat.  23" 
38'  N.,  and  SS"*  57'  E.  long.  Up  to  to-day  we  have  had  the 
water  smooth;  now,  however,  we  are  rolling  a  little,  and 
shall  doubtless  continue  to  roll  for  the  rest  of  the  passage. 
Thermometer  in  my  cabin  at  noon  90^ 

26^^ — ^Testerday  morning  at  eight  o'clock  we  anchored  off 
Guarder,  about  three  miles  from  the  landing-place  on  the 
beach ;  and  as  the  postmaster  and  the  agent  of  the  Bombay 
Government  were  not  expecting  us  to  arrive  before  the  28th, 
the  mails  were  not  ready,  and  we  were  consequently  detained 
waiting  for  them  until  6  p.m.     Gnarder  is  situated  on  the 


378  GUARDER—KURRACHEE. 

Persian  side  of  the  gulf,  bat  is  in  the  hands  at  present  of  the 
Saltan  of  Muscat,  who  only  lately  thrust  out  his  brother  and 
took  possession  of  it  himself.  The  town  contains  some  1500 
inhabitants,  principally  Belochees,  and  is  a  telegraph  fltation. 
Two  young  gentlemen  from  the  station  came  off  and  paBsed 
the  day  on  board  the  steamer.  We  embarked  at  Goarder  two 
boat-loads  of  cargo,  consisting  of  ghee,  cotton,  and  sliarb* 
fins.  We  found  the  Lynx  here,  and  she  left  in  search  of  tlie 
Briton  a  couple  of  hours  after  we  anchored.  Goarder  is  sita- 
ated  on  a  long  strip  of  sand,  open  to  the  sea  on  both  sides, 
and  connected  with  high  land  at  both  ends,  the  whole  form- 
ing a  deep  bay.  It  is  250  miles  from  Kurrachee,  towards 
which  port  we  are  now  bowling  along,  and  ought  to  reach 
to-morrow  morning  at  daylight.  Weather  fine,  and  some- 
what cooler ;  84""  in  my  cabin  last  night,  and  this  morning 
also  when  I  got  up.  A  little  swell  on.  We  have  had  fine 
weather  ever  since  we  left  Bussorah ;  in  fact,  ever  since  we 
left  Bagdad.  Variable  winds,  never  very  strong,  with  the 
heat  in  the  shade  at  noon  always  about  90*^,  sometimes  a  little 
higher,  and  in  the  night  varying  but  slightly  from  90^  Jnne 
and  July,  they  say,  will  be  still  warmer  in  the  gulf. 

27^A,  Kurrachee.  —  At  7  a.m.  we  crossed  the  bar  and 
anchored  in  Kurrachee.  Breakfasted  at  the  travellers' 
bungalow,  and  then  to  the  post-office,  where  I  found  let- 
ters from  home.  Arranged  with  Captain  G.'s  servant  to 
accompany  me  to  Lahore ;  wages  twenty  rupees  a  month, 
he  finding  himself  in  food,  which  of  course  he  never  dii 
Kurrachee — that  is  what  they  call  the  encampment — is  good 
three  miles  from  the  port ;  it  is  a  skeleton  city  to  all  intents 
and  purposes,  and  upon  a  very  large  scale.  The  houses  are 
all  new  built  of  sandstone.  The  roads — for  really  the  houses 
are  so  far  apart  from  each  other  they  cannot  be  called  streets- 
are  macadamised,  and  in  good  repair.  The  only  railroad  yet 
is  the  one  that  runs  to  Eotree  on  the  Indus,  opposite  to 
Hyderabad. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

On  the  Indus  in  steamer— Current  six  knots — Babool  wood  for  fuel— Ghattees  or 
floats— Hotter  than  purgatory— Sea-fish  come  up  to  spawn — Biver  three  miles 
broad — Heat  from  sandstone  hills  like  hot  blast— Government  revenue  for 
fishing— PallAh  fish- English  v.  natives;  former  should  know  better — ^Tempera- 
tore  116" — Forests,  herds  of  buffalo,  sutpar-cane— Villages  miserable— Sukkur — 
Bungalows  a  delusion — Old  minaret ;  legend ;  suicides  from  it — Indus  flotilla 
laid  up — 116^  under  awning — Cotton — Birds — Passengers,  Hindoos,  Mussulmans, 
Puseet,  Christians— Enjoj  a  bath  in  the  river — Alligators— Enter  the  Punjaub 
— Lascar  sailors- Scinde  men  and  women— River  four  miles  wide— Patience  of 
the  crew- Chenaub  river— Date-palms— Change  pilots  dailj ;  their  mode  of 
returning— Mouth  of  the  Sutl^e — Nine-knot  current^Mooltan  and  Lahore 
Bailway — ^Air  laden  with  dust— Rail  to  Lahore — Observations  on  board  steamer 
—Native  crew  looked  upon  as  dirt  bj  European  o£9cers— Ofiioer's  opinion  of 
Lords  Mayo  and  Northbrook  outrageous — Unjust  treatment  keeps  up  bad 
feeling— The  natives  quiet  and  docile — Murree- Brutality  towards  the  natives ; 
may  end  in  a  universal  outbreak — Hotel  kept  by  a  European — Disgusted,  leave 
the  public  gardens,  menagerie — Goojerat— Military  station  of  Rawul  Pindee — 
Murree  hill  station — Pleasant  temperature— Mist — Kohala,  first  stage  to  Kash- 
mir— ^Thunderstorm — Ilex,  horse-chestnut,  and  walnut  trees— Chuttar—Sus- 

.  pension  bridge  —  Enter  Kashmir  —  Timber  floated  down  —  Trees  —  Gorgeous 
Duttoflies — Himalayas— The  Jhelum  full  of  fish — Observations  on  the  Jhelum — 
Ghurr6e— Hard  lines  for  ooolies— Fine  scenery — ^An  aquatic  Blondin— Travelling 
in  Kashmir— Human  flesh  counts  for  little  in  India — Chicot^e— Author  dislikes 
the  "  quiet"  of  guide-bopks— Reflections— Dr  Cumming's  prophecies — llitindalee 
— Rioe  and  cotton  grounds — Deep  gullies  and  high  hills— Road  strewed  with 
apricots— Fine  views — Trees — B&ramiUa— Old  Hindoo  temple  of  Bhuniar^Sikh 
forts — Valley  of  Kashmir — Guide-books  incorrect — Noisy  Jhelum  now  placid 
— ^Take  to  bioat— Wulla  Lake— Country  partially  flooded— Homed  cattle  and 
honea—  Noroo  Canal—  Shadipore—  Sreenuggur. 

28tA  May,  on  board  steamer  on  the  Indus. — Last  night  at 
9.30  I  left  Kurrachee  by  rail  for  Kotree,  distant  105  miles, 
and  at  7  a.m.  got  to  the  end  of  my  journey;  so  that,  including 
stoppages,  we  travelled  on  this  Scinde  railway  about  as  fast 
as  a  good  horse  could  trot — a  little  over  eleven  miles  an  hour. 
So  far  as  I  could  see  as  we  moved  along,  the  country  we 
passed  through  was  nearly,  if  not  quite,  dry  and  barren.  The 
train  took  us  within  five  minutes*  walk  of  the  steamer,  so  I 
was  not  long  in  getting  on  board ;  and  about  8  a.m.  we  got 
under  way,  with  a  laden  barge  lashed  on  each  side.  The 
river  .is  very  much  swollen,  and  though  we  may  be  going 
along  ten  knots  through  the  water,  we  are  not  progressing 
more  than  four  over  the  ground.  Already  we  have  passed 
some  parts  in  which  the  river  is  three  miles  wide.     The  line 


3te  FISHERMEN— GJREA  T  HE  A  T. 

of  steamers  and  the  line  of  railway  belong  to  the  same 
company.  The  banks  of  the  river  are  low  and  uninteresting, 
but  few  buildings  seen  from  the  steamer's  deck,  and  a  good 
deal  of  jungle,  and  in  places  forests  of  the  babool-tree,  which 
supplies  fuel  for  the  steamers.  Men  floating  down-stream 
upon  chattees  fishing,  carrying  in  their  hands  a  long  pole 
with  a  net  attached  to  it^  seem  to  be  a  specialty  of  the 
Indus.  The  thermometer  over  my  head,  underneath  a  triple 
awning,  where  I  am  now  writing,  stands  at  lOO"",  and  still  the 
heat  is  not  oppressive.  I  shall  begin  to  believe  soon  that 
we  may  get  used  to  anything ;  and  perhaps  there  is  more 
truth  than  is  generally  believed  in  the  saying  that  eels  don't 
suffer  on  being  skinned.  All  through  the  Persian  Golf  the 
thermometer  was  rarely  below  90%  and  often  above  it;  and 
should  the  heat  go  on  increasing  as  we  proceed  up  the  rivei^ 
and  which  I  am  assured  it  will  do — why,  I  trust  that  none  of 
my  Roman  Catholic  friends  will  think  of  spending  a  single 
shilling  to  release  my  soul  from  purgatory,  for  I  feel  sure 
that  I  shall  rather  like  the  heat  there,  and  be  loth  to  leave 
it.  I  find  myself  again  the  only  cabin  passenger,  as  I  was 
on  board  the  City  of  London  from  Bagdad,  and  the  Ethiopian 
from  Bussorah.  This  is  a  powerful  little  paddle-wheel  boat, 
120  horse-power  engines,  and  drawing  only  3^  feet  of  water, 
and  about  165  feet  long.  I  am  told  we  may  be  twenty  days 
in  reaching  Sher  Shah,  and  there  we  take  the  rail  for  Mooltan 
and  Lahore.  It  seems  a  long  time  to  be  confined  to  this 
little  craft. 

29th. — My  second  day  on  board.  Slept  last  night  on 
deck,  and  pretty  comfortably.  We  made  fast  at  6  ?x 
yesterday,  and  could  not  have  done  more  than  twenty-five 
miles  of  the  more  than  570  that  divide  Kotree  from  Sher 
Shah.  This  morning  we  were  under  way  at  5  A.  m.  up  to 
noon ;  we  have  been  making  an  average  of  four  miles  an 
hour.  There  is  a  breeze  blowing  which  makes  the  heat 
bearable,  though  the  thermometer  under  the  awning  has  gone 
up  to  105"";  when  I  turned  out  at  5  a.m.  it  was  standing  at 
86°.  The  current  must  be  running  in  places  eight  knots, 
and  there  are  many  snags  showing  themselves  above  water. 
The  banks  are  very  low,  very  sandy,  and  very  uninteresting. 
With  the  exception  of  a  few  country  craft  proceeding  some 


CO  UNTR  Y  CRAFT— MAJENDA.  3(81 

op  and  some  down  the  river,  there  is  nothing  to  enliven 
it ;  neither  bird,  beast,  nor  fish  to  be  seen.  At  this  time  of 
the  year  these  conntry  craft  take  two  to  three  months  between 
Eotree  and  Sher  Shah.  The  heat  in  the  cabin  is  very 
bearable,  particularly  when  the  skipper  is  lying  asleep  on 
the  table,  as  it  is  then,  and  then  only  (anless  during  meal- 
time), that  the  punka  is  kept  at  work.  The  mosquitoes,  too, 
are  troublesome,  and  bite  hard.  Another  disagreeable  is  being 
obliged  to  keep  the  cabin  bull's-eyes  closed,  for  were  they 
open  we  should  be  subject  to  an  occasional  inundation,  so 
low  is  this  boat  in  the  water,  and  such  a  bobbery  does  she 
keep  up  in  forcing  herself  along,  hampered  by  the  two 
barges,  one  on  each  side,  laden  with  cargo. 

A  very  fine  salt-water  fish  is  taken  in  the  Indus  at  this 
season ;  they  evidently  come  up  to  spawn,  for  any  that  I 
have  seen  on  the  table  have  been  full  of  roe. 

30M. — ^We  made  fast  to  the  bank  at  5  p.m.  yesterday,  close 
to  one  of  our  stations  for  taking  in  wood.  Our  progress 
yesterday  must  have  been  about  forty  miles.  I  paid  a  visit 
to  a  large  native  village,  Majenda,  close  at  hand,  where  I 
bought  some  mangoes.  The  reflected  heat  from  the  sand  on 
shore  was*  stifling.  As  night  drew  on,  the  atmosphere 
became  cooler,  though  we  suffered  dreadfully  from  a  hot 
wind,  accompanied  by  clouds  of  dust;  later  on,  we  were 
enabled  to  take  up  our  position  on  deck,  and  so  we  managed 
to  pass  the  night  comfortably  enough.  This  morning  we 
were  under  way  at  five  o'clock,  and  have,  I  think,  up  to  now 
(noon),  been  making  fair  progress.  There  is  a  strong 
breeze  aft,  which  helps  us  somewhat,  and  more  so  still  the 
numerous  boats  which  are  near  us,  also  bound  up-stream. 
They  advance  faster  than  one  would  imagine,  but  they  have 
the  advantage  of  us,  by  being  able  to  pass  up  in  very 
shallow  water,  where  their  big  sail  is  assisted  by  half-a- 
dozen  men  tracking.  We,  on  the  contrary,  are  obliged  to 
keep  in  the  deepest  part,  and  have  often  to  pass  from  one 
side  of  the  river  to  the  other,  where  it  may  be  three  miles 
broad,  to  keep  in  the  constantly-changing  channel.  The 
thermometer  under  the  awning  to-day  marks  lOS"",  so  that 
we  walk  the  deck  in  an  atmosphere  fairly  heated.  In  the 
cabin,  under  the  punka,  and  somewhat   below  the  line  of 


382  SCHWAN—THE  PALLAH. 

water  rushing  past,  it  stands  at  93^  On  deck  at  5  A.1L, 
when  I  got  up,  it  was  standing  under  the  awning  at  M*, 
and  it  felt  then  delightfully  cool  and  pleasant.  We  aie 
now  close  upon  a  line  of  sandstone  hills,  which  come  riglit 
down  upon  the  river ;  and  the  heat  from  them,  they  say,  will 
be  so  great,  that  should  we  not  succeed  in  passing  beyond 
them  before  we  tie  up  for  the  night,  it  will  be  good-bje 
to  all  sleep  for  us. 

31^^. — The  latter  part  of  yesterday  was  unsettled  weather, 
squally,  and  the  wind  changeable,  with  a  couple  of  light 
showers  of  rain.  The  river  had  risen,  it  seems,  yesteidij, 
about  two  inches,  and  had  become  in  places  more  rapid; 
and  the  end  of  idl  this  was,  that  night  overtook  us  a  £ev 
miles  below  Schwan,  and  we  consequently  made  fast  to  the 
bank  at  7  p.m.  We  must  have  made  about  forty  miles  in  the 
seventeen  hours  we  had  been  steaming.  The  wind  came  off 
to  us  from  the  heated  sands  like  the  hot  blast  of  a  furnace, 
and  kept  the  thermometer  under  the  awning  to  upwards  A 
100'',  to  which  it  dropped  at  8  p.m.;  and  when  I  got  vp  this 
morning  at  4  a.m.,  it  stood  at  84^  It  is  now  11  A.M.,  and  it 
marks  lOS'',  and  in  the  cabin  under  the  punka  ^^ — a  veij 
bearable  heat,  were  it  not  for  the  mosquitoes,  which  are  a  greet 
plague  to  us.  Last  night  there  was  no  breeze,  and  the  hett 
on  deck  quite  drove  away  sleep.  The  skipper  had  a  punb 
going  all  night  over  him,  and  in  this  way  he  takes  precious 
good  care  of  himself.  At  six  we  drew  up  at  Schwan,  and 
took  on  board  firewood,  and  left  again  at  eight  o'clock, and  haye 
since  been  making  pretty  fair  progress.  The  Government^  it 
seems,  gets  a  revenue  from  the  fishery  on  this  river.  The 
principal  fish  taken  is  the  pcdlah ;  it  comes  into  the  riyer 
from  the  sea  about  February,  and  is  caught  as  high  up  as 
Sukkur,  and  even  beyond  sometimes,  upwards  of  five  han- 
dred  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the  Indus.  The  manner  of 
taking  this  fish  is  peculiar.  The  fisherman,  armed  with  a 
net  attached  to  a  pole  perhaps  twenty  feet  long,  embarks  on 
a  chattee  or  huge  earthen  vessel,  and  makes  his  way  into 
the  middle  of  the  stream,  laying  his  body  across  the  chattee, 
with  his  stomach  closing  the  mouth  of  it.  In  this  shape 
he  floats  down-stream,  with  his  net  thrust  down  close  to  the 
bottom.    The  pallah  is  always  caught  swimming  against  the 


FISHERMEN— ENGLISH  AND  NATIVES.       383 

stream,  and  when  the  fisherman  finds  that  a  fish  comes  in 
contact  with  his  net,  he  draws  a  string  which  closes  the 
month  of  the  net,  and  then  draws  it  up,  takes  ont  the  fish, 
and  after  killing  it  by  running  a  sharp  piece  of  iron  through 
its  heart,  he  places  it  in  his  chattee,  and  then  goes  on  with 
his  fishing.  It  is  curious  to  see  these  fishermen  following 
their  avocation,  fioating  down  the  stream,  sometimes  a  dozen 
or  more  of  them  in  a  line,  a  hundred  yards  or  so  apart.  The 
river  is  apportioned  out  to  them,  I  am  told,  into  about  four- 
mile  lengths.  The  skipper  and  mate  of  this  craft  complain 
more  of  the  heat  than  I  do,  which  should  not  be,  seeing  that 
the  latter  has  been  eight  years  on  the  river,  and  the  former 
thirteen ;  but  so  it  is,  nevertheless.  They  are  both  of  them 
of  that  class  that  do  their  utmost,  to  keep  up  an  antagonistic 
feeling  between  the  Englishman  and  the  native — a  class,  I 
am  afraid,  too  conunon  in  India — ^never  speaking  of  them, 
or  even  to  them,  but  as  niggers  or  brutes,  considering  them 
as  a  conquered  people,  and  that  they  should  be  treated  as 
a  conquered  people  were  treated  2000  years  ago,  and  kept 
in  order  by  the  lash  and  the  bullet ;  and  with  all  this  they 
complain  of  a  want  of  gratitude  and  respect  to  them  on  the 
part  of  the  natives  I 

June  \Bt. — Yesterday  afternoon  I  went  on  deck,  and  found 
the  thermometer  under  the  awning  standing  at  116'',  with 
a  strong  breeze  heated  up  to  that  point  coming  off  from  the 
sandy  fiat  we  were  passing.  It  felt  like  a  blast  from  the 
open  mouth  of  a  red-hot  furnace.  The  blast  after  awhile 
died  away,  and  the  wind  shifted  to  a  light  breeze  from  the 
opposite  quarter,  which  brought  the  glass  down  in  one  hour 
to  110'';  and  such  was  the  effect  of  the  sudden  fall  of  six 
degrees,  that  I  felt  the  110^  temperature  to  be  delightful; 
and,  at  the  time,  thought  I  should  never  like  to  see  it  any 
lower.  As  the  squalls  shifted,  so  the  glass  rose  or  fell  be- 
tween the  hours  of  three  and  eight  o'clock,  and  at  bedtime 
it  had  settled  down  to  102^  When  I  turned  out  at  5  a.m. 
Unday,  it  stood  at  SG**,  and  now,  at  noon,  it  marks  112^ 
We  made  fast  to  the  bank  last  evening  at  5.30,  and  took  in 
a  good  lot  of  wood.  Whilst  we  were  fast  at  the  bank|  some 
fifty  country  sailing  crafty  with  enormous  lateen  sails,  passed 
us,  bound  upwards,  at  the  rate  over  the  ground  of  at  least 


384     FORESTS  OF  THE  BABOOL—LOW  BANKS 

three  miles  an  hour,  with  a  breeze  of  wind  we  could  scarce!? 
feel.     These  craft  quite  skim  the  surface,  though  some  d 
them  may  be  nearly,  if  not  quite,  a  hundred  tons  burthen, 
and  sail,  consequently,  very  fast     We  were  under  way  at 
4.30  A.M.,  and  have  been  making  good  way  ever  since.    Te9- 
terday  we  could  hardly  have  made  twenty  miles,  and  at  one 
time,  for  an  hour  or  more,  we  appeared  to  be  fairly  standing 
still,  though  we  were  going  through  the  water  at  the  time 
good  nine  knots.     The  two  laden  barges  we  have  alongside 
must  be,  one  a  hundred  tons,  and  the  other  eighty. 

2d. — Forests  of  the  babool-tree  and  herds  of  boffalo  on 
the  river  banks.  A  porpoise  is  the  only  fish  I  have  seen. 
We  arrived  at  our  station  at  5.30  p.m.  yesterday,  where  we 
made  fast  and  wooded,  having  done  a  good  day^s  work,  abont 
forty  miles.  We  were  close  alongside  a  village  and  some 
signs  of  cultivation,  a  patch  of  sugar-cane,  and  some  water- 
melons ;  a  pair  of  bullocks,  too,  were  employed  raising  water 
for  irrigating.  Fowls  and  eggs  were  brought  down  for 
sale;  6d.  apiece  was  demanded  for  the  former,  and  4d.  a 
dozen  for  the  latter.  A  dozen  fishermen  were  collected 
here,  and  went  o£f  in  a  line  on  a  fishing  excursion,  some  with 
chattees,  and  others  with  large  calabashes,  to  float  upon.  At 
bedtime  the  thermometer  stood  at  102'',  and  at  90*  when  I 
got  up  at  5  A.M. ;  now,  at  10  A.M.,  it  marks  109°.  There  ii 
but  little  wind,  scarcely  more  than  that  caused  by  the  vessel 
going  through  the  water  at  the  rate  of  nine  knots  an  honr, 
with  two  heavy  barges  in  tow,  and  not  more  than  four  knots 
over  the  ground. 

Z(L — We  stopped  at  3  p.m.  yesterday,  and  took  in  400 
maunds  of  wood,  one  hour's  work,  and  then  went  on  again 
until  we  stopped  for  the  night  at  7  p.m.  We  must  have 
made  a  good  day  s  work  yesterday,  fifty  miles  I  shoold 
think.  There  is  but  little  variation  in  the  scenery:  very 
low  banks,  even  swampy  in  places,  and  thickly  covered  with 
young  tamarisk-trees  (jowh)  and  acacia  (babool) ;  the  vil- 
lages are  of  the  most  miserable  kind,  but  more  nmnerons— 
a  slight  framework  of  poles,  roughly  covered  over  with  straw, 
and  nothing  more.  Since  we  left  Eotree^  I  have  had  to  chronicle 
one  slight  disturbance  in  the  weather,  and  that  of  very  short 
duration  ;  with  this  single  exception,  it  has  been  fine  through- 


SUKKUR--THE  MINARET— LEGEND.  385 

out  When  I  rose  from  the  deck  this  morning^  the  thermo- 
meter  stood  at  84'' ;  by  ten  o'clock  it  had  got  up  to  108°, 
and  now  it  marks  112^  We  were  under  way  at  4.30  thia 
morning,  and  hope  to  reach  Sukkar  pretty  early  to-morrow. 
Sakknr  is  good  half-way  between  Eotree  and  Sher  Shah. 
As  we  have  cargo  for  Sukknr,  we  may  possibly  be  kept  there 
for  two  days. 

MK — Stopped  at  3  p.m.  yesterday  and  took  in  wood,  and 
then  went  on  again  until  8.30,  when  we  hauled  alongside  the 
bank  for  the  night.  We  were  away  at  four  this  morning. 
The  night  was  cool,  and  the  thermometer  at  5  a.m.  was  down 
to  80"";  by  ten  it  was  standing  at  112^  We  then  stopped 
and  took  in  200  maunds  of  wood.  It  costs  fifteen  to  eigh- 
teen rupees  per  hundred  maunds  of  80  lbs.  each,  which  will 
be  as  much  as  we  shall  require  to  take  us  to  Sukkur,  about 
twenty  miles  distant 

6^,  Sukkur. — We  arrived  here  at  6  p.m.,  and  we  were  no 
sooner  fairly  made  fast  than  I  went  on  shore  with  the  notion 
of  getting  a  comfortable  dinner  and  passing  a  quiet  night  at 
the  travellers'  bungalow;  but  I  was  disappointed,  for  the 
travellers'  bungalow  turned  out  to  be  without  anything  to 
eat  Neither  was  there  a  cook  or  utensils  for  cooking,  not 
even  a  stretcher  to  lie  down  upon ;  so  there  was  nothing  for 
it  bat  to  return  to  the  steamer,  and  I  was  fortunately  in 
time  for  dinner.  I  passed  the  night  comfortably  enough  on 
deck,  my  old  quarters.  This  morning  went  to  the  bazaar 
before  breakfast,  and  bought  some  thin  stu£f,  and  left  it  with 
a  tailor  to  be  made  into  trousers  and  pajamas^  and  then 
visited  the  minaret,  the  only  one  here,  and  to  which  a  legend 
is  attached.  The  minaret  is  centuries  old,  and  was  built, 
they  say,  by  a  lover  who  was  called  upon  to  do  something  to 
immortalise  himself  before  his  loved  one  could  be  induced 
to  look  favourably  upon  his  pretensions.  The  minaret 
finished,  the  pair  ascended  to  the  top,  when,  as  the  story 
goes,  the  fair  one  said  jocularly  to  her  lover,  "  You  dare  not 
jump  off  this  minaret,  now  that  you  have  built  it  I "  She 
had  no  sooner  spoken  than  he  took  the  fatal  leap,  and  was 
of  course  instantly  killed,  for  the  minaret  must  be  100  feet 
high.  I  think  they  say  that  the  fair  one,  horrified  by 
the  fate  of  her  lover,  followed  his  example,  and,  like  him, 

2b 


386  LEA  VE  SUKKUR— CANAL, 

was  crashed  to  pieces  on  the  rock  beneath.  Whether 
storj  has  anything  to  do  with  it  or  not,  certain  it  is  Out 
more  than  one  person  has  lately  committed  suicide  by  jump- 
ing from  the  top  of  the  minaret,  and  the  Gh>vemment  hife 
consequently  shut  up  the  entrance  to  the  steps  that  kid 
to  it. 

Sukkur  is  a  stone-built  town,  with  tolerably  clean  streeti, 
and  an  extensive  flight  of  stone  steps  leading  from  the  riier 
up  to  the  bund,  and  upon  which  there  are  some  very  fine 
mango  and  other  trees.  Sukkur  contains,  they  say,  some 
10,000  inhabitants;  among  them  is  a  good  sprinkling  of 
Europeans.  On  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  the  left  btnk, 
is  Roree,  and  on  a  rock  in  the  middle  of  it  is  a  fortieBS. 
Here  it  is  proposed  to  build  a  bridge,  and  to  proceed  witk 
the  railway  on  the  left  bank  to  Mooltan.  The  railway  lAki 
is  to  connect  Sukkar  with  Sher  Shah  up  the  river,  and  with 
Kotree  down  the  stream,  is  being  now  actively  proceeded 
with.  The  Government  Indus  flotilla,  consisting  of  some 
half-dozen  iron  steamers,  is  now  laid  up  here,  their  ultinate 
fate  still  undecided. 

^iK — We  remained  at  Sukkur  until  this  morning,  and  it 
5  P.M.  made  a  fresh  start  en  route  for  Mooltan.  We  landed 
a  few  tons  of  cargo  at  Sukkur,  and  received  a  few  packageelbr 
Mooltan,  and  one  passenger.  The  weather  was  very  hot  yes- 
terday, 116''  under  the  awning.  As  we  steamed  through  the 
Sukkur  Pass,  in  which  the  river  is  compressed  between  the 
island  and  Roree,  where  the  current  frequently  runs  so  strong 
tliat  steamers  have  difficulty  in  stemming  it,  we  came  ia 
sight  of  the  entrance  gates  of  the  Sukkur  Canal,  on  the 
right  bank  of  the  river — a  gigantic  work,  by  which  a  great 
extent  of  country  is  brought  under  cultivation ;  and  on  the 
opposite  side,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river,  we  could  see  the 
entrance  of  the  Nurra,  deepened  by  canalisation,  also  carry- 
ing a  large  body  of  water.  Sukkur,  and  everywhere  about 
it  for  a  few  square  miles,  is  limestone  rock ;  and  Boree  on 
the  left,  and  Sukkur  on  the  right  bank,  with  an  old  fortren 
of  considerable  extent  on  one  island,  and  a  well-preserved  nin 
of  an  ancient  nunnery  on  another,  make  together  a  good 
picture ;  but  you  soon  lose  it,  for  you  are  hardly  well  through 
the  pass  when  you  come  to  low  banks,  all  allaviaL 


RODA— BIRDS  AND  TERRAPIN.  387 

ItL — We  hauled  alongside  the  bank  at  six  last  even 
ing  at  Boda  station^  and  took  on  board  sufficient  wood  for 
this  day's  work.  There  is  a  large  patch  of  cotton  grow- 
ing here.  At  2  p.il  the  thermometer  stood  at  114°.  The 
first  part  of  the  night  was  very  hot,  and  it  was  not  until 
towards  morning,  when  a  fresh  breeze,  moderately  cool,  sprang 
up,  that  I  could  get  any  sleep.  At  4.30  this  morning  we 
were  o£f,  and  at  nine  stopped  and  communicated  with  the 
steamer  Indus  bound  down-stream.  Birds  numerous,  and 
terrapin  plentiful  on  the  banks.  Temperature  at  5  A.M.  86% 
and  now  (2  p.m.)  IIO''.  No  change  in  the  appearance  of  the 
river  banks — ^low  everywhere,  and  with  but  little  cultivation. 

8^A. — Did  not  reach  the  regular  wood  station,  but  stopped 
at  6.30  for  the  night.  No  breeze  to  cool  the  air  for  us,  as 
we  lay  on  the  deck  in  vain  courting  sleep  until  four  o'clock 
this  morning,  when  the  bustle  consequent  on  getting  under 
way,  and  the  washing  of  decks,  obliged  us  to  turn  out.  At  5 
A.M.  the  temperature  was  86^  At  6.30  we  reached  our  wood 
station,  and  here  we  found  a  few  better  sorts  of  huts  than  we 
had  met  with  elsewhere.  As  the  shore  was  convenient  for 
the  purpose,  all  our  deck  passengers,  male  and  female,  took 
to  bathing,  the  women  moving  away  from  the  men  a  hun- 
dred yards  or  so.  The  bathers  seemed  to  enjoy  themselves 
thoroughly  in  the  water,  and  one  bald-headed  gourmand 
revelled  in  the  luxury  of  smoking  his  hubble-bubble  with  the 
water  up  to  his  chin.  Among  the  women  was  a  young  bride, 
whom  her  friends  seemed  to  take  especial  pleasure  in  washing. 
The  passengers  consist  of  an  admixture  of  Mussulmans,  Hin- 
doos, Parsees,  and  Christians.  We  have  been  an  hour  and  a 
half  occupied  in  taking  on  board  500  maunds  of  wood,  and 
we  are  now  under  way  again.     10  a.  m.,  102^ 

9tA. — From  noon  yesterday  up  to  the  time  of  stopping  for 
the  night  we  encountered  a  strong  current,  so  strong  at  times 
that  we  were  enabled  to  do  little  more  than  hold  our  own 
against  it,  and  were  driven  at  last  to  haul  alongside  the  bank 
so  far  from  our  wood  station  that  it  has  taken  ns  five  hours 
this  morning  to  reach  it  The  river  is  very  wide  here,  and 
full  of  shallows,  and  the  banks  are  but  a  trifle  above  the 
surface  of  the  stream.  We  passed  the  mouth  of  one  canal, 
which  carries  a  large  body  of  water  into  the  desert,  by  which, 


388  ALLIGATORS— jNATIVE  CREIV. 

I  am  told,  some  thirty  miles  of  oomitxy,  as  the  crow  fliei, 
are  abready  benefited.  Numbers  of  alligators  on  a  long 
shallow  close  to  which  we  have  passed  this  morning.  At  i 
A.if.,  SG"" ;  now  at  ten,  96^  We  are  now  alongside  the  buk 
taking  in  wood  to  last  ns  until  to-night,  when  we  hope  we  mif 
have  arrived  at  the  next  station ;  bnt  this  is  donbtfuL  We 
have  now  reached  the  commencement  of  the  Ponjanb,  haTio; 
hitherto  been  travelling  by  the  river  boundary  of  the  Seiode 
territory. 

10^^ — ^We  did  not  arrive  at  the  wood  station  last  night, 
as  we  had  hoped  to  do,  though  we  steamed  on  until  &^ 
o'clock.  We  had  to  bring  up  some  four  or  five  miles  brfoie 
we  came  to  it.  The  night  was  moderately  cool,  and  I  paiMd 
it  comfortably  enough,  though  we  had  little  or  no  breeie  to 
help  us.  At  five  this  morning,  half  an  hour  after  we  got 
under  way,  the  thermometer  marked  84°;  at  10  A.1L  it 
stood  at  OS"",  and  now  it  is  at  108**.  We  reached  the  wood 
station  at  7  a. if.,  and  took  on  board  400  maunds.  We  come 
in  sight  of  huts  occasionally,  and  large  herds  of  bo&la 
The  banks  of  the  river  low  and  very  uninteresting,  as  I  feel 
that  this  diary  is.     Hardly  any  cultivation. 

The  sailors  or  lascars  of  this  craft  get  thirteen  rupees  • 
month,  and  for  each  of  them  five  rupees  a  month  is  handed 
to  the  tindal,  who  provides  the  mess — ^a  pound  of  meats 
day  for  each  man,  besides  dried  fish,  onions,  ghee,  rice,  and 
other  small  matters.  They  are  well  fed,  and  the  tindal  is 
believed,  nevertheless,  to  pocket  out  of  the  whole  a&ir 
something  like  twenty  rupees  a  month.  Including  the  fire- 
men and  engineers,  the  crew  of  this  craft  numbers  thirty 
men.  In  doing  their  work,  they  seem  always  to  be  six  1^xm 
four,  huddled  together  one  upon  top  of  the  other;  and 
it  is  not  unusual  to  see  a  fellow  stop  in  the  midst  of 
washing  decks,  put  the  bucket  to  his  mouth,  and  deliberatelj 
wash  his  teeth,  an  operation  in  the  performance  of  which 
they  are  mighty  particular ;  and  beautiful  teeth  they  inwi- 
ably  have ;  and  if  you  see  a  score  of  them  standing  togethff, 
you  might  be  sure  that  nineteen  of  them  are  showing  their 
teeth.  We  have  hardly  a  native  in  this  boat  the  featorea  of 
whose  face  are  not  regular,  and  in  many  cases  handsome, 
and  whose  carriage  is  not  good.     In  their  persons,  these 


GOT  AGROUND'-LA  YING  OUT  ANCHORS,     389 

Scinde  men  are  very  cleanly ;  pretty  nearly  all  Mossnlmans, 
though  I  am  told  there  are  a  few  Hindoos  among  them.  We 
have  half-a-dozen  women  on  board,  whose  fingers  and  arms 
are  loaded  with  rings,  their  legs  with  heavy  silver  anklets, 
and  their  ears  and  noses  with  rings  also;  even  a  little  girl 
of  foor  years  old  is  rigged  out  with  a  profusion  of  all  these 
ornaments.     Most  of  the  men,  too,  wear  earrings. 

Wth. — ^Abont  5.30  p.m.  yesterday  we  got  aground  on  a 
sandbank  in  the  middle  of  the  river,  which  is  here  good 
four  miles  wide ;  and  after  running  out  a  couple  of  anchors, 
and  making  some  puny  efforts  to  get  off»  we  relinquished 
the  attempt  for  the  night;  and  ever  since  daybreak  this 
morning — and  it  is  now  noon — ^we  have  been  endeavouring 
to  move,  but  so  far  unsuccessfully.  The  heat  is  very  trying, 
standing  still  as  we  are,  though  the  night  was  pretty  cool. 
Thermometer  at  5  a.m.  85^,  at  ten  OG"",  and  now  at  noon  100°. 
At  2  P.M.  we  are  on  our  way  again,  which  is  more  than  I 
expected.  The  current  of  five  miles  an  hour,  which  is  running 
here,  makes  it  very  troublesome  work  laying  out  anchors, 
an  operation  performed  entirely  by  the  natives,  under  the 
management  of  the  native  serang.  Neither  the  skipper  nor 
the  mate  chose  to  expose  themselves  in  the  boats  under  such 
a  sun  as  we  have  here  now.  The  fellows  have  worked  in  the 
boats  ever  since  daylight,  eleven  hours^  without  eating  any- 
thing, and  without  a  grumble,  though  they  have  been  very 
considerably  bullied. 

\2ih. — ^We  passed  last  night  alongside  the  bank  comfortably 
enough,  having  hauled  up  at  6.30.  This  morning  we  were 
under  way  at  4  a.m.  or  a  little  after,  and  by  nine  we  were 
again  brought  up  at  a  station  where  we  spent  hard  on  a 
couple  of  hours  taking  on  board  700  maunds  of  wood.  We 
consumed  nearly  all  we  had  on  board  when  we  grounded, 
for  we  were  obliged  to  keep  up  steam  to  a  certain  point  in  case 
of  emergency,  even  when  we  were  immovably  aground ;  so 
that  our  reserve  stock  in  the  bunkers,  which  had  not  been 
touched  before  from  the  time  of  leaving  Kotree,  had  to  be 
appealed  to,  and  had  become  somewhat  low.  At  about  8  a.m. 
we  passed  Mittum  Koti,  and  almost  immediately  afterwards 
the  old  mouth  of  the  Indus,  or  what  had  been  the  mouth  of 
the  Indus  only  a  year  before,  when  it  became  silted  up,  and 


390  THE  CHENAUB. 

the  river  then  broke  through  into  the  Chenaub  some  foor 
miles  higher  up.  The  Chenaub  is  still  a  wide  river,  bot 
with  less  current  than  we  have  lately  experienced  in  the 
Indus.  The  banks  show  more  signs  of  cultivation.  At  5  jlk 
SS"*,  at  ten  102'' ;  a  strong  breeze  blowing  right  aft,  wliidi 
makes  it  pleasant  on  deck,  though  the  pufb  occasioiiall/ 
come  oflF-shore  pretty  warm. 

IZtk. — There  are  some  date-palms  now  on  the  banks  of  the 
Chenaub,  which  are  more  enlivening  to  look  at  than  tke 
jowh  (or  tamarisk)  and  the  tiger-grass,  which  has  been  pnttf  ^ 
nearly  all  but  constant  ever  since  we  left  Eotree.  Ibe 
Chenaub,  though  not  so  wide  as  the  Indus,  is  still  a  oonnder* 
able  stream.  We  have  been  on  a  sandbank  to-day,  bnt  gol 
off  without  much  trouble.  We  brought  up  at  a  wood  station 
at  7.30  last  evening,  where  we  embarked  600  miaunds  of  wood, 
and  remained  there  until  4.30  this  morning ;  and  althoogk 
we  have  been  once  aground  since,  we  have,  on  the  wliok, 
made  good  way,  favoured  by  a  strong  breeae  from  &W. 
One  of  the  river  craft  passed  us  yesterday  afternoon  bound 
for  Mooltan,  almost  as  if  we  had  been  at  anchor,  and  by 
this  time  must  be  fifly  miles  ahead  of  us,  for  she  woold  ran 
all  night  Our  pilot  (for  we  change  pilots  every  day)  left 
us  yesterday  afternoon  on  a  goat-skin ;  he  had  twenty  miki 
to  return  to  his  home  down-stream.  The  goat-skin  was  tied 
by  the  legs  round  the  pilot's  thighs,  the  throat  held  in  hit 
hand  until  fully  inflated  ;  he  then  dropped  over  the  stem  of 
the  barge  into  the  river,  and  was  soon  out  of  sight  On  bis 
head  he  carried  all  his  kit,  and  was  swept  down-stream  at 
the  rate  of  seven  or  eight  miles  an  hour.  The  river  is  piet^ 
full  of  alligators,  but  it  would  seem  they  do  not  meddle  witb 
men  in  the  water ;  they  must  be  good-natured  fellows  of 
their  species,  these  alligators,  for  in  Central  America  yon 
have  only  to  tumble  into  Lake  Nicaragua,  or  some  otha  lake 
or  river,  and  you  get  snapped  up  in  a  moment  At  noon 
to-day  we  passed  the  mouth  of  the  Sutlege,  leaving  it  on  oar 
right  hand.  Thermometer  at  5  a.m.  Se"",  at  ten  102^  Ibe 
strong  breeze  tempers  the  heat,  or  at  any  rate  makes  it  torn 
bearable;  at  2  p.m.  ]04^  This  is  my  seventeenth  day  on 
boai'd.     Wc  hope  to  run  on   until  nearly  eight  o*clock  thw 


STRONG  CURRENT— SHER  SB  AH.  391 

evening ;  and  if  bo,  we  shall  have  made  a  good  day's  work, 
and  may  possibly  reach  Sher  Shah  to-morrow  evening. 

IMu — Wehad  a  strong  current  against  ns  yesterday,  and  were 
consequently  obliged  to  bring  up  at  the  bank  before  reaching 
the  wood  station,  for  we  could  not  see  our  way  after  6.30. 
The  night  was  tolerably  cool — ^that  is,  after  eleven  o'clock,  for 
the  breeze  did  not  spring  up  until  after  that  hour.  This 
morning  at  4.30  we  were  away  again,  and  at  six  stopped  at 
a  wood  station,  and  took  on  board  400  maunds.  We  are 
now  (10  A.M.)  fighting  a  hard  battle  with  a  current  that 
sometimes  gets  the  better  of  us ;  and  when  this  happens,  it 
must  be  running  nine  knots,  for  we  ourselves,  when  the  wood 
is  good,  are  generally  making  way  through  the  water  at  about 
that  rate.  The  river  has  risen  considerably,  and  in  many 
places  has  overflown  its  banks.  Our  pilot  left  us  at  the 
wood  station,  and  went  off  as  usual  on  his  inflated  skin.  It 
wonld  take  him,  he  said,  about  seven  hours  to  reach  his 
home.  The  thermometer  stood  at  92°  at  five  this  morning, 
and  now,  at  ten,  it  marks  100°. 

Ibthy  Sher  Shah.  —  We  reached  this  terminus  of  the 
Mooltan  and  Lahore  Bail  way  at  9.30  this  morning,  just  in 
time  to  miss  the  only  daily  train  that  runs  to  Mooltan  from 
Sher  Shah,  a  distance  of  eleven  miles ;  so,  unless  we  can  get 
the  station-master  to  send  us  on  by  trollies,  we  shall  have  to 
remain  here  until  to-morrow  morning  at  nine  o'clock.  There 
are  two  or  three  huts  at  this  station,  and  nothing  more.  The 
railway  station,  although  a  rail  extends  to  the  landing-place, 
is  a  mile  and  a  half  distant  Although  the  thermometer  did 
not  get  beyond  lOO""  last  night,  or  not  quite  so  high  perhaps — 
for  this  morning  at  five  it  marked  only  92'' — the  night  was 
most  oppressive,  for  there  was  not  a  breath  of  air  stirring, 
and  it  was  certainly  the  most  uncomfortable  night  I  have 
passed  on  board  this  craft.  This  travelling  on  the  Indus  and 
Chenaub  in  the  summer  months  is  very  tiresome,  for  we  have 
been  coming  from  Eotree,  a  distance  of  about  575  miles,  not 
counting  the  day  we  remained  at  Sukkur,  eighteen  days. 
The  heat  has  been  excessive,  averaging  100°  in  the  twenty- 
four  hours  during  the  whole  nineteen  days.  For  the  last  two 
days  the  banks  of  the  Chenaub  have  been  all  but  overflow- 
ing everywhere.     This  steamer  is  but  a  tug-boat,  and  though 


.•■ 


392  LAHORE^IMPALPABLE  DUST. 

her  accommodation  is  well  enough,  yet  the  fact  of  her  having 
to  bring  along  two  large  flats,  with  cargo  and  passengers, 
makes  her  very  uncomfortable.  What  with  the  tremendou 
noise  caused  by  the  three  craft  driven  through  the  wiler 
against  a  current  sometimes  running  nearly  nine  knotSy  and 
certainly  averaging  six,  by  a  bit  of  a  boat  working  up  tofoar 
or  five  hundred  horse-power,  and  constantly  getting  agronnd, 
or  jamming  up  against  the  banks ;  and,  worse  than  ill 
perhaps,  the  blowing  off  the  boiler's  steam  half-a-doien 
times  a  day, — I  say,  with  the  uproar  caused  by  all  thia,  the 
making  a  passage  in  one  of  these  boats  is  anything  but  a 
pleasant  operation.  From  the  first  I  have  looked  upon  my 
trip  on  the  Indus  as  purely  penitential,  and  as  such  I  hare 
borne  its  inconveniences  without  a  murmur.  As  fcr  as 
Sukkur  I  was  the  only  passenger,  eight  days ;  at  Snkkur 
another  came  on  board,  on  his  way  to  Simlah ;  and  higher  up 
the  river,  at  Mittum  Koti,  we  were  joined  by  a  gentleman 
connected  with  the  opium  department,  who  had  been  triTel- 
ling  in  the  Punjaub  on  a  special  mission. 

Ylth^  Lahore. — On  the  15th  we  were  all  day  at  Sher 
Shah,  having  arrived,  as  I  said  before,  about  an  hoar  after 
the  train  had  started.  The  weather  was  extraordinarily  doee 
and  hot ;  no  air  stirring,  and  the  atmosphere  filled  with  an 
impalpable  dust,  which  prevented  one  from  seeing  any  object 
clearly  and  distinctly  even  at  a  few  yards*  distance,  and 
bounding  the  vision  completely  beyond  a  couple  of  hundred 
yards  or  thereabouts.  This  state  of  things  continued  up  to 
early  this  morning,  when  the  atmosphere  cleared  as  we  neared 
the  Lahore  terminus.  For  two  days  we  never  had  a  glimpse 
of  the  sun,  though  there  was  not  a  cloud  (a  vapoury  dond) 
in  the  sky.  I  am  told  that  this  sort  of  weather  usually  lasU 
more  or  less  in  Mooltan  in  summer  for  three  or  four  months 
on  a  stretch.  How  people  manage  to  live,  breathing  such 
an  atmosphere,  loaded  with  dust,  for  so  long  a  time,  is  diffi* 
cult  to  understand.  We  reached  Sher  Shah  at  8.46  yester- 
day morning,  and  it  took  us  three-quarters  of  an  hour  to  get 
to  Mooltan,  a  distance  of  only  eleven  miles.  At  Mooltan  we 
went  to  the  dak.  bungalow,  whence  we  essayed,  after  getting 
breakfast,  to  take  a  look  at  the  city ;  but  the  heat  was  so 
stifling,  and  the  atmosphere  so  laden  with  fine  dust,  that  we 


TREATMENT  OF  NA TIVES.  395 

were  fain  to  get  under  cover  again  as  quickly  as  possible. 
At  4.50  P.M.  we  started  by  train  for  Lahore  (208  miles),  and 
reached  the  city  at  5.30  this  morning,  more  than  twelve 
hours — a  miserable  pace  for  a  steam-rail.  My  first  visit, 
after  enjoying  the  luxury  of  a  cool-water  bath  (for  on  board 
the  steamer  on  the  Indus  the  water  was  always  superlatively 
warm),  was  to  the  post-office,  where  I  found  a  budget  of 
letters.  The  whole  distance  between  Mooltan  and  Lahore, 
80  far  as  we  could  see  from  the  train,  was  a  desert,  or  say  a 
eandy  desert  with  a  sprinkling  of  stunted  trees  here  and 
there,  and  as  flat  as  the  palm  of  your  hand  ;  a  ride  through 
a  more  uninteresting  country  it  would  be  difficult  to 
iioagine. 

I  do  not  regret  my  trip  up  the  Lidus ;  there  was  excite- 
ment in  it.  The  efforts  made  by  our  little  steamer  to  force 
her  way  against  the  current,  at  times  almost  too  much  for 
her,  lugging  along,  as  she  had  to  do,  two  laden  flats  heavier  than 
herself,  which  could  not  be  relaxed  for  a  moment ;  constantly 
crossing  and  recrossing  the  stream  to  keep  in  the  proper 
channel,  which  was  always  shifting;  stopping  frequently 
twice  a  day  to  take  in  wood;  the  constant  surveillance 
necessary  to  keep  the  craft  from  running  aground ;  stopping 
the  engines  a  dozen  times  a  day  without  any  warning  to  clear 
the  feeding-pipe,  which  was  constantly  getting  choked  by 
rubbish  floating  down  the  rapid  stream,  or  to  blow  off  the 
boilers ;  the  coming  and  going  of  our  pilot  on  his  inflated 
goat-skin,  which  happened  every  day  ;  the  peculiar  mode  of 
fishing  for  pallah  followed  by  the  natives ;  large  country  boats 
passing  up  and  down  stream ;  an  occasional  alligator  or  a 
porpoise  showing  up  for  our  amusement ;  the  alluvial  banks  of 
the  river  tumbling  in  by  tons  at  a  time,  washed  away  by  the 
angry  swollen  stream,  carrying  with  it  sometimes  large  trees, 
and  occasionally  the  fragile  native  huts  :  all  these  things  kept 
us  constantly  on  the  alert.  Then,  again,  it  was  amusing  to 
stroll  about  on  the  deck  of  the  large  flat,  where,  formed  into 
little  parties,  were  a  hundred  and  odd  passengers.  Christians, 
Parsees,  Mussulmans, and  Hindoos, men,  women,  and  children; 
in  fact,  there  was  no  lack  of  excitement  on  board  our  little 
boat  The  manner  in  which  the  officers  of  the  steamer 
treated  the  crew  and  native  passengers  could  not  but  draw 


394  TREA  TMENT  OF  NA  TIVES, 

constant  attention :  they  never  spoke  to  them  or  of  thoiii 
either  before  their  faces  or  behind  their  backs,  but  as  brutes, 
savages,  or  niggers ;  and  a  day  never  passed  that  there  was 
not  kicking  and  cuffing  going  on.     A  word  otherwise  than  iq 
a  savage  tone  I  never  heard  addressed  by  an  officer  to  amta 
all  the  time  I  was  on  board*     The  men  on  every  and  on  all 
occasions  were  treated  by  the  officers  as  dirt  under  their  feet; 
and  in  so  coarse   a  manner,  in  fact,  that   I  used  to  &el 
ashamed  these  men  were  my  countrymen.     One  day,  at  the 
dinner-table,  when  I  was  the  only  passenger,  the  skipper  aod 
the  mate  were  abusing  the  natives  generally  for  their  want  of 
gratitude  and  good  feeling  towards  them,  calling  them  at  the 
same  time  by  the  most  opprobrious  and  degrading  names. 
After  dinner,  when  the  servants  had  left  the  cabin,  I  said  to 
the  first  officer,  ^^Do  these  native  servants,  who  all  understand 
English,  and  before  whom  you  have  been  talking  in  such 
unmeasured  terms  of  abuse  of  the  natives  generaUy,  identify 
themselves  with  you  as  apart  from  their  countrymen,  or  do 
they  consider  themselves  as  part  and  portion  of  the  people  joa 
have  been  abusing  ?  "    "Of  course,"  he  said  laughingly,  " the 
brutes  identify  themselves  with  their  own  people."    I  then 
suggested  that  perhaps  it  might  be  unwise  to  talk  before  these 
servants,  knowing,  as  he  must,  that  they   would  certainly 
repeat  to  every  one  of  the  150  natives  on  board  the  steamer, 
and  possibly  in  a  very  exaggerated  form,  everything  that  had 
been  said  at  the  table.     Was  it  not,  I  asked  him,  unnatoral 
to  expect  gratitude  (gratitude  for  what?)  and  good  feeling 
from  people  whom  he  abused  on  all  occasions  in  such  ui- 
measured  terms — whom  he  treated  as  dirt  under  his  feet; 
men  to  whom  he  never  spoke  but  in  a  tone  that  showed  he 
considered  them  as   mere  filth,  unworthy  of  any  but  the 
grossest  treatment?      This    way  of  looking  at  the  matter 
seemed  to  be  something  quite  new  to  him,  and  quite  strange 
also.     It  had  never  entered  his  mind  that  these  natives  should 
be  treated,  or  had  any  right  to  be  treated,  otherwise  than  as 
dogs,  or,  as  he  was  fond  of  calling  them,  a  conquered  people. 
It  must  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  this  behaviour  of  the 
officers  towards  the  natives  is  not  exceptional,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  is  more  or  less  a  fair  sample  of  the  manner  in 
which  the  natives  are  treated  by  Englishmen  employed  on 


TREATMENT  OF  NATIVES^MURREE.         395 

board  vessels  in  the  Indian  coasting  trade.  The  great  bulk  of 
these  Englishmen  are  prejudiced,  if  not  ignorant ;  and  those 
imong  them  who  have  been  long  in  the  trade  have  had  it, 
I  am  afraid,  instilled  into  them  that  the  natives  must  be 
coerced,  must  be  kept  down  by  rigorous  treatment — ^must,  in 
fact,  be  made  to  feel  on  all  occasions  his  positive  inferiority 
to  the  race  who  rule  him.  This  class  of  Englishmen  possess 
great  power  for  doing  harm  in  India.  In  their  occupations 
they  mix  up  more  freely  with  natives  than  men  in  higher 
positions  do ;  and  I  believe  it  is  these  men  more  than  any 
others  who,  by  their  unjust  treatment  of  the  natives,  keep  up 
the  bad  feeling  that  exists,  and  render  abortive  the  honest 
oideavours  of  such  men  as  Lord  Mayo  to  bring  about  content- 
ment in  the  country,  and  something  like  a  feeling  of  con- 
fidence in  the  breast  of  the  native.  I  don't  believe  there  is 
any  other  people  in  the  world  who  would  bear  so  patiently 
BQch  ill-treatment  as  these  natives  do.  On  board  this  steamer 
there  were  150  natives  to  half-a-dozen  Englishmen ;  how  is 
it,  then,  I  have  often  thought,  that  the  150  allow  themselves 
to  be  abused  to  the  extent  they  do  by  the  half-dozen  English- 
men ?  How  is  it  that  instances  of  mutiny  among  them  are 
not  more  frequent  than  they  are?  How  is  it  they  don't  rise 
at  night,  and  throw  these  half-dozen  petty  tyrants  into  the 
sea?  If  they  at  all  resembled  the  picture  drawn  of  them  by 
their  oppressors,  they  would  do  so,  for  under  such  circum- 
stances men  seldom  calculate  consequences.  The  fact  is,  the 
natives  generally  are  the  quietest,  the  most  docile,  and  the 
most  easily-governed  people  under  the  sun.  Who  that 
considers  the  relative  numbers  of  the  governors  and  the 
governed  in  India  can  come  to  any  other  conclusion  ? 

24M,  Murree. — The  first  thing  I  saw,  on  sallying  out  for  a 
walk  from  the  hotel  this  morning,  was  an  exhibition  of  power 
which  position  gives  over  thorough  helplessness — a  young 
fellow,  of  whom  there  are  many  here  just  now,  beating  a 
native  servant,  who  neither  murmured  nor  resisted.  Now 
here  you  have  an  instance  of  the  brutality  of  an  educated 
class.  How  is  it,  I  ask  myself,  that  all  these  young  fellows — 
and  I  am  afraid  a  good  many  of  the  old  fellows  too — in  their 
treatment  of  natives,  are  just  as  brutal  as  the  uneducated  seor 
faring  Englishman  in  the  Indian  coasting  trade  ?    In-  their 


396  TREATMENT  OF  NATIVES. 

interconrse  with  the  native  servants,  the  manner  in  whidi 
they  address  them,  the  tone  and  the  language  they  use  to- 
wards them,  all  is  designed  to  impress  upon  the  natiTe  hk 
positive  inferiority ;  that  he  is,  in  fact,  a  slave  in  all  respecti 
but  the  name  to  his  proud  conquerors.  How  is  it,  I  ask,  tbt 
the  educated  Englishman — sons,  for  the  most  part,  of  our  own 
aristocracy,  who  in  England  have,  perhaps,  never  dared  to 
raise  a  hand  against  a  man  in  an  inferior  position  of  life  to 
themselves — should  hardly  have  arrived  in  India  wben  he 
at  once  takes  to  kicking  and  cuffing  the  natives  ?  Does  he 
adopt  the  habit  because  it  gives  him  pleasure,  and  knowing 
that  he  can  generally  indulge  in  it  without  the  risk  of  retalia- 
tion ?  One  would  really  suppose  that  these  young  fellowB, 
had  the  thing  been  possible,  in  place  of  being  Englishmen, 
who  had  been  living,  up  to  the  time  of  leaving  home,  in  a 
country  where  the  poor  man  is  at  any  rate  as  safe  from  ^xst- 
poreal  ill-treatment  as  the  wealthiest  individual  in  the  land, 
had  spent  their  youth  upon  the  sugar  estates  of  Jamaica,  or 
on  the  cotton  lands  of  the  Southern  States  of  America,  before 
the  curse  of  slavery  was  abolished  in  both  places.  Be  this  as 
it  may,  we  have  the  broad  fact  before  us,  that  our  coantiy- 
men  in  India,  filling  subordinate  positions  in  every  station  of 
life,  civil  as  well  as  military,  treat  the  natives  generally  as 
dirt  under  their  feet,  and  never  lose  an  opportunity  of  im- 
pressing upon  them  by  word  or  deed  their  thorough  inferi- 
ority in  the  scale  of  human  beings.  There  was  one  observation 
I  could  not  help  making  to  myself  on  board  the  steamer  on 
the  Indus,  that  the  half-dozen  Europeans  on  board  were  all 
pudding-faced,  slouching  fellows,  whilst  almost  every  indi- 
vidual of  the  Scinde  and  Punjaub  crew  were  well-grown  men, 
with  handsome  features  and  a  noble  carriage ;  and  yet  these 
hundred  men  permitted  themselves  to  be  lorded  over,  to  be 
called  by  the  names  most  hateful  to  them,  and  to  be  kicked 
and  cuflFed,  by  these  half-dozen  ordinary-looking  English- 
men, without  daring  to  resist  These  Indians  surely  must 
be  something  more  than  human  beings,  or  something  very 
much  less,  if  such  treatment  as  is  meted  out  to  them  should 
not  BOW  the  seeds  of  deep  and  lasting  hatred  to  their  rol^ 
generally,  which  it  needs  not  be  a  prophet  to  foretell  most 
some  day  or  other,  when  a  favourable  opportunity  presents 


HOTELATLAHORE— GARDENS— MENAGERIE.  397 

itself,  bear  the  fmit  of  a  universal  outbreak.  Doubtless  the 
present  policy  of  the  Indian  Government  is  exercised  in  the 
direction  of  protection  to  the  masses  from  the  oppression  of 
the  few,  but  it  is  more  than  probable  that  the  brutal  conduct 
of  the  Europeans  filling  inferior  positions  in  India  will  go  a 
long  way  towards  neutralising  that  policy. 

On  my  arrival  at  Lahore,  I  went  to  the  Boyal  Victoria 
Hotel,  and  which  I  was  glad  to  leave  again  the  next  day. 
It  is  managed,  or  mismanaged,  by  an  Englishman,  who,  like 
most  of  our  countrymen  in  India  who  pretend  to  keep  hotels, 
I  found  was  much  too  great  a  man  to  look  after  his  hotel,  or 
in  any  way  to  attend  to  the  wants  of  his  visitors :  so  I  re- 
turned next  day  to  the  ddk  bungalow,  where  I  had  been  for 
an  hour  on  my  first  arrival,  and  there  joined  iliy  fellow-pas- 
senger by  steamer  and  railway ;  with  him,  too,  I  visited  the 
public  gardens,  and  the  Montgomery  and  Lawrence  Halls : 
the  former,  which  cost  £20,000  only  a  few  years  ago,  is  now 
being  pulled  down  in  consequence  of  a  serious  settlement 
produced  by  permitting  a  small  canal  to  be  brought  too  close 
in  passing  one  end  of  the  building.  The  public  gardens  have 
been  very  creditably  got  up,  and  are  kept  in  good  order. 
There  is  a  menagerie  attached  to  the  gardens ;  but  really  the 
heat  was  so  great  when  I  visited  it,  that  the  birds  and  beasts 
were  all  panting  for  breath,  and  in  their  own  minds  appa- 
rently pining  after  the  freedom  of  natural  life  in  the  forest. 
There  was  one  animal,  however,  who  was  rationally  employed 
in  mitigation  of  his  misery,  and  that  was  a  large  black  bear 
located  at  the  bottom  of  a  deep  well,  but  with  a  very  scanty 
supply  of  water :  here  Bruin  was  occupied,  as  he  stretched 
himself  out  in  his  shallow  bath,  in  splashing  himself  with 
water,  using  one  of  his  forepaws  for  the  purpose,  and  in  turn- 
ing over  occasionally,  that  both  sides  might  be  served  alike. 
Evidently  Mr  Bear  understood  how  to  make  the  most  of  a  bad 
position. 

On  the  21st  I  hired  a  Oovemment  conveyance,  a  sort  of 
van  with  accommodation  for  two  inside  and  two  outside  pas- 
sengers ;  but,  to  be  able  to  carry  my  luggage  with  me,  I  hired 
the  whole  of  the  van,  for  which  I  paid  B.70.8  to  Bawul 
Pindee,  distant  170  miles.  Soon  after  leaving  Lahore,  at  5 
P.M.,  we  crossed  the  river  Bavee  by  a  bridge  of  boats,  and  at 


398     WUZERABAD^GOOJERAT—RAWUL  PINDEE. 

daylight  next  morning  we  were  ferried  across  the  Cheninb 
and  the  Wuzerabad,  and  landed  at  Qoojerat.  At  noon  we 
leached  Jhelum,  after  first  crossing  the  river  in  a  ferryboat; 
and  there  we  remained  until  6  p.m.,  when  we  again  got  under 
way,  and  reached  the  very  extensive  military  station  of  Band 
Pindee  at  six  in  the  morning.  Here  I  abandoned  the  Tin 
and  got  breakfast,  and  at  nine  left  in  another  Qovernment 
conveyance,  a  sort  of  dogcart  drawn  by  a  pair  of  horses,  iritk 
a  covering  against  sun  and  rain,  for  this  hill  station,  Hnnee, 
where  I  arrived  at  two  o'clock,  distance  forty  miles.  I 
experienced  considerable  delay  in  finding  a  place  to  put  up  it, 
but  ultimately  succeeded  in  getting  a  room  at  Poweirs  Hold, 
where  I  am  now  enjoying  the  change  from  Lahore  tempen- 
ture,  ranging  between  90**  and  100**,  to  Murree  temperature, 
between  70**  and  80°. 

The  road  all  the  way  from  Lahore  to  Bawul  Pindee  is  good 
and  nearly  level,  until  the  Jhelum  river  is  neared,  when  it 
becomes  slightly  hilly  and  through  a  rough  country.  The 
cultivation  is  nowhere  extensive  on  the  whole  route.  Start- 
ing from  Bawul  Pindee,  until  you  come  to  the  foot  of  tie 
hills,  you  travel  at  a  rapid  pace,  over  a  road  than  which 
there  is  none  better  in  England ;  and  indeed  the  whole  road 
to  Murree  is  very  good.  Ever  since  I  arrived  here  the  place 
has  been  enveloped  in  mist,  and  the  highly-vaunted  scencrj 
of  the  Himalayan  Mountains  has  been  yet  unseen  by  mc, 
though  I  have  been  more  than  twenty-four  hours  in  its  midst 
It  put  me  in  mind  of  what  I  once  encountered  at  St  Johns, 
New  Brunswick,  where  I  remained  three  days  immersed  in  i 
fog,  which  during  that  time  prevented  me  from  seeing  quite 
across  the  principal  street.  The  houses,  pretty  villas  for  tie 
most  part,  are  dotted  over  a  large  extent  of  hills  completely 
covered  with  trees,  so  thick  that  the  excellent  roads  running 
in  every  direction  are  entirely  hidden,  and  apparently  the 
houses  seem  to  be  perched  among  the  trees  in  inaccessible 
places ;  but  this  is  not  the  case,  for  there  is  a  good  path,  if 
not  a  carriage-drive,  leading  to  every  house  in  Murree. 

21th^  Kohala. — ^At  7  a.m.  I  left  Powell's  Hotel,  at  Mnprec, 
on  horseback,  with  my  man  Antonio  on  a  mule,  our  luggage 
being  carried  by  five  coolies,  to  whom  I  have  paid  eight 
annas,  or  Is.  each,  for  bringing  it  twenty-one  miles,  and  I 


MURREE—DA  WUL-^  CHUTTAR.  399 

oni  not  quite  sure  that  I  have  not  paid  them  an  anna  each 
more  than  they  were  entitled  to.  For  my  horse  I  paid  Mr 
Powell  four  rupees,  and  for  the  mule  one  rupee ;  this  is  for 
the  first  stage  from  Murree  towards  Kashmir,  twenty-one 
miles.  In  future  the  charge  for  a  horse  will  be  eight  annas 
a  stage  or  march,  from  bungalow  to  bungalow,  average  dis- 
tance about  twelve  miles,  until  we  reach  Sreenuggur. 

I  breakfasted  at  Dawul,  twelve  miles  from  Murree  and  ten 
from  Kohala.  There  is  a  good  dak  bungalow  at  Dawul,  and 
here  also  there  is  one,  prettily  situated  among  the  moun- 
tains, thickly  clad  with  trees,  and  just  above  the  rapid 
river  Jhelum,  which  is  the  boundary  here  between  our  terri- 
tory and  that  of  the  Rajah  of  Kashmir.  I  arrived  here  at 
2  P.M. ;  Antonio,  with  the  coolies,  did  not  show  up  until 
past  four  o'clock. 

The  ride  from  Dawul. — The  road  is  good  all  the  way  from 
Murree  to  the  Jhelum,  a  descent  in  the  twenty-one  miles  of 
about  4000  feet.  This  place,  according  to  my  aneroid,  is 
about  3100  feet  above  the  sea,  and  Murree  is  about  7300  feet. 
Soon  after  I  got  under  cover  here,  it  began  to  thunder,  and 
80  continued  very  heavily,  accompanied  by  much  forked 
lightning,  for  somewhat  more  than  three  hours.  At  first 
the  thunder  came  with  a  dust-storm,  and  finished  up  with  a 
deluge  of  rain.  The  road  from  Murree  to  Dawul  is  through 
forest  for  the  most  part:  ilex,  horse-chestnut,  and  walnut 
predominate.  For  the  last  three  miles  the  road  runs  along 
by  the  right  bank  of  the  Jhelum ;  and  a  mile  and  a  half 
before  reaching  this  bungalow,  it  crosses  by  a  pretty  little 
suspension  bridge  a  mountain  stream  which  enters  the 
Jhelum  at  right  angles.  The  mist  of  Murree  still  continues, 
and  80  far  I  have  had  no  glimpse  of  the  distant  Himalayas. 
It  is  warm,  the  thermometer  standing  after  the  rain  at  91  ^ 

28/A,  Chuttar. — This  place  consists  of  half-a-dozen  peasants' 
cottages,  and  a  dak  bungalow,  a  two-story  stone  building, 
affording  no  accommodation  beyond  a  couple  of  stretchers,  a 
couple  of  chairs,  and  two  tables.  It  contains,  in  all,  six  good- 
sized  rooms,  and  is  surrounded  by  a  balcony  up-stairs  and 
down.  The  place  is  in  charge  of  a  tJiekadar^  who  supplies 
travellers  with  chickens,  eggs,  and  milk,  brought  from  the 
village,  but  nothing  beyond.     The  village  and  the  bungalow 


400  THE  JHELUM. 

stand  upon  a  plateau  about  3100  feet  above  the  sea,  over- 
looking the  Jhelum,  and  at  an  angle  of  the  bed  of  a  moun- 
tain torrent  which  runs  into  the  Jhelnm ;  but  there  is  no 
water  to  speak  of  in  it  at  present.  The  plateau  must  be  500 
feet  above  the  river.  The  distance  from  Kohala  to  Ghnttar 
is  set  down  at  eleven  miles.  On  leaving  the  bungalow  it 
Kohala,  five  minutes'  walk  up-stream  brought  us  to  a  neit 
suspension  bridge  spanning  the  river,  and  over  which  we 
entered  into  the  territory  of  the  Maharajah  of  Kashmir. 
The  Jhelum  is  about  seventy-five  yards  broad  at  the  bridge^ 
and,  so  far  as  I  have  seen  of  it,  retains  about  the  same  width 
for  many  miles  up  and  down  stream  from  Kohala.  It  is  deep 
and  rapid,  and  now  very  muddy,  the  surface  of  it  being  half 
covered  with  logs  of  timber  floating  down,  each  on  its  own 
account,  to  the  several  depots.  How  these  logs  discover  their 
own  particular  depot,  I  can't  tell ;  they  certainly  all  seem 
pretty  lively  as  they  float  down-stream,  but  they  are  hardly 
sharp  enough,  I  should  think,  to  distinguish  between  their 
own  and  their  neighbour's  depot.  After  crossing  the  bridge, 
we  at  once  commenced  the  ascent  of  the  Dunna  Dank, 
the  road  leading  at  the  same  time  up  the  mountain,  and 
along  in  sight  of  the  river  below.  In  fact,  during  the  whole 
ride  of  eleven  miles,  we  only  once  lost  sight  of  the  river  for 
a  few  minutes,  though  we  were  at  times  more  than  1000 
feet  above  it,  and  at  others  only  a  couple  of  hundred.  The 
road  is  good  for  horses  the  whole  way,  and  well  wooded  from 
end  to  end;  the  acacia,  ilex,  willow,  pomegranate,  apricot, 
and  other  trees,  covering  the  whole  side  of  the  mountain.  As  1 
came  along,  I  saw  some  of  the  most  gorgeous  butterflies  I  had 
ever  set  eyes  on.  It  took  me  three  hours  to  get  here  from 
Kohala,  and  the  luggage  coolies  spent  over  the  journey  four 
and  a  half  hours.  I  have  already  eaten  two  breakfasts  (it  i^ 
now  two  o'clock),  and  am  now  resting  here  until  to-morrow 
morning,  it  being  too  hot  to  ride  onwards  to-day ;  the  ther- 
mometer standing  in  the  balcony  at  97'',  and  in  the  sun  at 
120^ 

The  mist  was  off  the  mountains  as  I  left  Kohala  this 
morning,  and  for  the  first  time  I  got  a  pretty  fair  view  of 
the  lower  range  of  the  Himalayas,  but  saw  no  snow  any- 
where.   In  fact,  in  travelling  this  road  so  far  from  Kohala,  I 


RHARA— THE  JHELVM— FLOATING  TIMBER.  401 

have  been  penned  up  among  mountains  starting  from  my 
very  feet  up  to  a  great  height,  and  shutting  out  entirely  all 
view  of  those  more  distant  There  is  no  barrenness  anywhere ; 
the  mountains  are  clothed  with  green  from  top  to  bottom. 
I  have  seen  but  little  cultiyation  to-day;  rice  and  Indian 
com  to  a  small  extent  only,  and  not  half-a-dozen  head  of 
cattle  on  the  whole  road.  The  Kashmirians  whom  I  have 
met  to-day  make  very  profound  salaams,  that  is,  when  they 
dare  to  make  a  salaam  at  all,  and  sometimes  the  poorer  sort 
stand  stockstill  as  you  pass  them.  They  are  quite  as  humble 
as  the  Qneen^s  own  Indian  subjects. 

29^,  Rhara. — ^We  have  been  three  hours  coming  over 
these  nine  miles  from  Chuttar.  The  road  crosses  many 
deep  gorges ;  and  as  it  rained  all  last  night,  the  torrent-bed 
near  Chuttar,  which  had  no  water  in  it  yesterday,  was  this 
morning  filled  to  the  brim,  and  a  good  deal  of  time  was 
oocnpied  in  crossing  it. 

Daring  the  whole  route  the  Jhelum  is  kept  in  sight,  con- 
siderably more  swollen,  and  bearing  along  on  its  surface 
logs  of  timber  without  end.  This  bungalow,  situated  some 
fifty  feet  above  the  river,  is  about  3000  feet  above  the 
sea ;  it  constitutes  Rhara,  for  there  is  not  another  building 
in  sight  of  it  There  is,  however,  some  little  rice  cultivation 
about,  and  doubtiess  some  few  cottages  might  be  found 
stowed  away  somewhere  among  the  trees.  The  Jhelum,  I 
am  told,  is  full  of  fish,  but  none  but  English  excursionists 
ever  catch  any. 

29th. — ^This  morning  a  distant  peak  of  the  Himalayas, 
with  a  littie  snow  on  it,  was  in  sight.  I  have  been  here  now 
since  half-past  eight  this  morning,  and  have  made  a  mistake 
by  remaining,  for  the  day  has  turned  out  first-rate  for  travel- 
ling, being  cloudy,  and  the  thermometer  at  88''  only  under  the 
balcony.  The  noisy.  Jhelum  is  coursing  along  just  below  me, 
carrying  with  it  logs  of  timber,  trees  (root  and  branch),  as  well, 
as  severed  roots  and  branches  of  all  sizes  and  descriptions, 
both  rotten  and  sound.  They  are  all  carried  down  at  the 
same  pace,  seven  to  eight  miles  an  hour,  regardless  of  their 
worth  :  it  may  be  likened  to  the  stream  of  life  hurrying  on 
with  its  freight  of  human  beings — all  sorts,  rich  and  poor, 

the  worthy  and  the  worthless — destined  all   for  the  same 

2c 


402        COURSE  OF  THE  JHELUM—GHURR&E. 

bourn.  It  is  amusing  to  watch  these  trees  tumbling  oier 
each  other,  as  they  are  hurried  down  the  stream.  Oooir 
sionally  you  may  observe  one  bigger  than  the  rest  ton 
into  the  eddy,  where  it  manages  for  awhile,  in  spite  of  the 
turbulent  stream,  to  hold  its  own;  but  its  efforts  are  in  ▼aio: 
a  turn  or  two  round,  and  it  falls  again  within  the  influence  of 
the  pitiless  stream,  and  is  carried  with  the  rest  towards  that 
bourn  whence  it  never  returns.  K  this  Jhelum  has  scooped 
out  its  own  bed  amongst  this  Himalayan  range,  the  woil 
must  have  taken  a  mighty  long  time  to  accomplish,  for  in 
places  it  must  have  had  to  cut  through  mountains  thousands 
of  feet  in  height ;  and  if  it  should  ever  desire  to  change  its 
course,  it  certainly  will  never  be  able  to  do  so  in  this  neigh- 
bourhood, janmied  in  as  it  is  between  the  rocky  baiib  of 
perpendicular  precipices  rising  to  the  height  of  thousands  of 
feet  on  either  side  of  it  Poor  Jhelum !  You  have  yonndf 
made  your  own  bed  (I  suppose),  and  you  will  have  to  lie  on  •" 
it  as  long  as  you  live. 

The  Jhelum,  called  by  the  natives  Vethu^ta^  by  the  Ma- 
hometans Vekut^  is  the  Hydaspes  of  the  ancients.  It  is  fomed 
by  a  junction  of  three  streams,  the  Arput,  the  Bringh^and 
the  Sundrahan,  in  Kashmir,  close  to  Eunbul,  and  about  sixfy 
miles  from  Baramula,  where  it  leaves  the  valley  of  Kash- 
mir. It  enters  the  Punjaub,  and  at  a  place  called  Sida  it 
joins  the  Ghenaub,  and  flows  on  with  that  river  until  fir 
below  Mooltan,  when  both  become  absorbed  in  the  Indus. 
Jhelum !  I  look  upon  thee  already  as  an  old  friend,  and  I 
have  not  half  done  with  thee  yet ;  for  I  have  to  foUow  thee  vif 
on  horseback  all  the  way  to  Baramula,  and  there  I  shall  haie 
to  embark  upon  thy  bosom  (which  I  trust  to  find  more  tran- 
quil than  it  is  hereabouts),  and  on  it  be  tracked  along  all  the 
way  to  Sreenuggur,  the  distance  from  Bhara  being  about  135 
miles.  They  tell  me,  Jhelum,  thou  hast  had  many  a  victim 
at  and  below  Kohala ;  but  the  suspension  bridge  has  made 
me  feel  quite  friendly  towards  thee.  It  is  but  right  to  speik 
of  both  men  and  things  as  we  find  them. 

ZQthy  Gkurree. — It  has  taken  me  five  and  a  half  hours  to 
come  to  this  rest-house  from  Bhara,  where  I  slept  last  night, 
and  which  we  left  this  morning  at  6.15.  We  stopped  for  an 
hour  at  Thundalee  until  the  coolies  arrived  with  the  luggage 


COOLIES^HOW  PAID— A  FEAT  IN  SWIMMING.  403 

(foarteen  miles),  and  then  came  on  here,  eight  miles  more.  The 
latter  part  of  the  ride  pretty  hot;  thermometer  in  the  shade  92^ 
Hie  same  coolies  who  brought  my  luggage  from  Bhara  to  Thun- 
dalee  continued  with  it  on  to  Ghurr6e,  and,  to  be  allowed  to  do 
80,  Uiey  had  to  pay  the  Gh)vernment  at  Thundalee  half  an 
anna  ft  man,  and  another  half  anna  a  man  here  at  Ghurr6e. 
A  coolie  receives  four  annas  per  load  for  luggage  (sixty  pounds 
perhaps),  for  each  stage,  whether  the  stage  be  short  or  long ; 
BO  that  each  coolie  was  entitled  to  receive  from  me  eight 
annas,  or  one  shilling,  for  bringing  his  load  twenty-two  miles, 
less  the  anna  of  which  he  was  mulcted  for  having  been  allowed 
to  work  out  of  bounds.  Hard  lines  this  for  the  poor  coolies ! 
The  road  all  the  way  (twenty-two  miles),  made  for  the  most 
part  along  the  mountain-side,  with  a  few  very  sharp  ascents, 
keeps  within  sight  of  the  Jhelum,  sometimes  running  close 
down  to  it,  and  at  others  a  thousand  feet  above  it.  The  river 
and  the  mountain  Scenery  blend  together  very  harmoniously 
between  Rhara  and  Thundalee  (fourteen  miles);  and  here  and 
there,  assisted  by  more  cultivable  ground  than  I  have  elsewhere 
lately  met  with,  and  some  very  picturesque  sweeps  taken  by 
the  Jhelum  in  its  efforts  to  find  an  easy  passage  through  the 
mountains,  make  some  views  by  which  the  traveller  cannot  but 
be  particularly  struck.  The  mist,  which  had  for  many  days  hung 
about  the  mountains,  has  this  morning  completely  disappeared; 
and  yet  I  have  seen  only  one  peak  with  snow  upon  it.  Ghurree, 
by  my  aneroid,  is  3500  feet  above  the  sea.  The  rise  in  the  last 
twenty-two  miles  has  been  500  feet,  and  350  within  the  last 
eight  miles ;  and  this  increase  in  the  elevation  has  been  evi- 
denced by  the  Jhelum  having  become,  between  Thundalee  and 
Ghurr^,  almost  a  rapid.  In  sight  of  this  bungalow,  a  few 
hundred  yards  down-stream,  the  river  has  widened  out,  and  an 
island  covered  with  trees  has  sprung  up  in  the  centre.  This  is 
the  only  island  I  have  yet  seen  in  the  Jhelum.  As  I  wrote  this 
last  word,  a  man  presented  himself  before  me,  asking  if  I  de- 
sired to  see  a  feat  in  swimming  in  the  long  rapid  that  flows 
past  this  bungalow  ;  and  forthwith  he  stripped  (not  a  diffi- 
cult matter),  and  struck  out  into  the  rapid,  and  succeeded  in 
landing  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  after  having  been 
carried  down-stream  a  couple  of  hundred  yards,  in  the  course 
of  which  he  made  several  neat   somersaults,  which  would 


404 


CHIKOTAE'-NO  carriage-road  in  KASHIthf. 


not  have  disgraced  even  Blondin  himselfl      The  river  is  \mt 
really  rapid,  and  some  sixty  yards  broad.     Ghurr^,  besides 
the  dak  bungalow,  consists   of  a  few  flat-roofed  cottages. 
Bice  to  some  extent  is  caltivated,  and  to-day  I  have  observed 
many  men  employed  in  transpkmting  it     This  bungalow  i« 
prettily  situated,  close  to  the  river  bank,  npon  a  plateau  of 
some  two  to  three  hundred  acres  lying  between  the  river  and 
the  foot  of  the   mountain.     For  the  first  time  I  saw  some 
prickly  pears  to-day,  bearing  a  handsome  large  yellow  flower. 
Starting  from  the  British  frontier,  there  is  no  carriage-road 
by  any  of  the  routes  into  Kashmir,  neither  is  there  a  single 
road  for  wheeled  vehicles  in  that  country.      The  exenrsioos 
into  Kashmir   from  India  are  made  generally  on   foot  bf 
young  men  who  go  fishing  and  shooting ;  by  ladies  in  doolies 
borne  along  by  men  ;  and  by  old  men  like  myself,  on  horse- 
back.     Ponies  are  to  be  hired  at  every  dak  bungalow  on  all 
the  routes,  distant  apart  from  eight  to  fourteen  miles :  tliej 
cost  eight  annas  (Is.)  a  stage  from  bungalow  to  bungalow, 
whether  the  distance  be  eight  or  fourteen  miles,  and  are  changed 
at  every  stage.     A  man  is  always  sent  with  the  pony,  and  ii 
included  in  the  charge  of  eight  annas.      Human  flesh  does 
not  count  for  much  in  India.     There  is  many  a  man  who 
only    earns,   and   manages    to   live  on  two  rupees  (48.)  t 
month. 

July  Isty  ChikoUe. — This  is  on  the  Jhelum,  and,  acceding 
to  my  aneroid,  stands  at  3800  feet  above  the  sea,  being  300 
feet  above  Ghurree,  twenty-four  miles  farther  down-stream. 
Between  Ghurree  and  Thimdalee,  the  guide-book  tells  us,  we 
are  carried  by  the  road  inland,  and  that  into  quiet  scenerj, 
"very  pleasing  after  being  so  long  subjected  to  the  cloee 
acquaintanceship  of  the  noisy  Jhelum. ''  Certes,  the  quiet  I 
got  into  was  like  the  quiet  of  death,  which  I  don't  think  at 
all  pleasant.  Give  me  the  noisy,  romping  Jhelum :  to  be 
near  it,  watching  its  convolutions,  is  exciting:  I  like  it 
Death  in  the  battle-field  might  be  different ;  but  death,  tbe 
ordinary  death  of  a  sick  man :  first,  perhaps,  the  loss  of 
mind ;  then  some  days  of  stupor,  and,  as  the  event  draws 
nigh,  unconsciousness  of  all  that  is  passing  around  him-' 
efforts  are  made  by  his  friends,  perhaps,  to  arouse  him,  to 
excite  his  attention  by  some  act  which  in  other  days  coaM 


GHURR&E—THCnDALEE— LOTUS  PLANTS.    405 

not  have  failed  to  awaken  him  up.  All  is  of  no  avail  now : 
with  closed  eyes  and  quickening  breath  the  immediate  result 
is  bat  too  closely  foreshadowed :  his  respiration  becomes  tur- 
bid, his  breathing  shorter  and  shorter,  until  at  last,  with 
half-open  mouth,  he  gives  a  gasp,  and  those  who  are  watching 
by  his  bedside — in  a  whisper  it  may  be — exclaim,  "  It  is  all 
over  I"  Can  it  be  possible  that  any  man  during  this  insensi- 
bility which  generally  precedes  death  ever  had  a  glimpse  into 
anoUier  world  ?  I  remember  to  have  heard  a  celebrated  Lon- 
don preacher  once  say  in  a  sermon,  either  that  he  believed 
such  glimpses  were  enjoyed  by  saints  who  were  very  ill,  but 
who  had  recovered,  or  that  he  had  really  known  an  instance 
of  the  sort.  Was  he  drawing  upon  his  imagination,  I  wonder, 
when  he  was  thus  addressing  his  congregation ;  or  did  he 
attain  to  such  knowledge  by  the  same  deep  reasoning  that 
enabled  him  to  foretell  that  the  world  would  come  to  an  end 
in  1870  ?  0  that  imagination  I  how  many  evils  result  from 
over-abondantly  indulging  it  I  I  owe  my  greatest  grief  to 
giving  too  much  play  to  my  imagination.  Within  bounds  it 
may  be  all  very  well,  but  let  it  loose,  and  no  man  can  foresee 
into  what  trouble  it  may  lead  him. 

I  started  from  Ghurr^e  at  five  this  morning,  and  reached 
Thundalee  at  eight,  distance  twelve  miles.    After  leaving  the 
Jhelmn  at  Ghurr^e  (it  was  only  for  awhile),  we  got  in  among 
a  good  deal  of  rice  cultivation  and  some  cotton  grounds ;  but 
what  was  really  a  pretty  sight  was  two  or  three  acres  of 
swampy  ground  we  tumbled  upon,  covered  over  entirely  by 
the  freshest  and  greenest  of  rushes — not  very  many  of  them — 
mixed  up  with  a  grand  display  of  the  beautiful  lotus  plant, 
all  in  ffOl  bloom.     It  was,  I  thought,  one  of  the  prettiest 
things  I  had  looked  upon  for  some  time.    After  this  I  passed 
into  the  silence  of  death :  I  did  not  like  it ;  and  was  well 
pleased  when,  malgre  the  guide-book  to  the  contrary,  all  at 
once  I  came  again  upon  my  boisterous  friend  the  Jhelum.  At 
Thundalee  we  were  detained  two  hours  waiting  for  coolies,  so 
that  we  did  not  get  away  from  the  bungalow  until  half-past 
ten  o'clock.    The  stage  to  this  place,  Chikotee,  is  fifteen 
miles  good,  and  the  road  passes  through  half  a  hundred 
(more  or  less)  deep  gullies,  and  over  as  many  high  hills, 
always,  however,  within  sight  or  sound  of  the  Jhelum.     It  is 


4o6      OORUN  BOAH^OORi.E—A  STIFF  STAGE. 

a  very  tedious  road,  and  took  me  nearly  fonr  honrs  to  get 
over  the  fifteen  miles,  and  the  coolies  with  the  luggage  were 
more  than  seven  hours  over  it.  The  road  in  great  part  ib 
shady,  which  I  appreciated,  and  was  really  literally  strewed 
with  small  apricots  blown  from  the  trees  that  line  it  Apricot 
and  pomegranate  trees  abound  more  than  any  other  through 
this  route.  Thermometer  in  the  bungalow  at  7  p.m.  down  to 
78^     What  a  blessing  I 

2rf,  Oorun  Boah. — Slept  last  night  at  Chikotee,  and  left  at 
six  this  morning  for  Ooree,  distance  fifteen  miles^  and  arrived 
there  at  10  a.m.  This  stage  is  said  to  be  the  stiffest  on  the 
whole  route.  Well,  there  may  be  more  descents  into  deep 
gullies,  and  more  ascents  by  rougher  roads  than  usual,  but 
that  is  all.  The  small  bridges  spanning  mountain-streami 
in  many  of  the  gullies  are  in  bad  condition,  and  I  was  nearly 
coming  to  grief  in  passing  over  one  of  them — a  very  narrow  one; 
for  my  pony  put  one  leg  through  right  up  to  the  shoulder. 
Fortunately,  I  succeeded  in  sticking  to  the  saddle,  for  there 
was  not  breadth  of  bridge  on  either  side  of  the  pony  to  girc 
me  a  landing-place,  and  ov6r  the  bridge  I  should  have  had  t 
fall  among  water  and  boulders  of  at  least  a  dozen  feet  The 
pony,  however,  made  good  use  of  his  three  free  legs,  and,  like 
a  man,  succeeded  in  extricating  himself.  There  are  many  fine 
views  to  be  enjoyed  on  this  stage — one  in  particular,  obtained 
from  a  jutting  point  at  a  great  height,  commanding  an 
extensive  range  both  up  and  down  stream.  On  arriving 
atOor^e,  I  breakfasted,  and  left  again  at  1  p.m.,  arriving  here 
at  4  p.m.  The  distance  is  only  ten  miles,  but  the  road  is  in- 
teresting, so  I  came  slowly  along.  The  greater  part  of  it  is  by 
the  river,  lined  on  both  sides  by  a  variety  of  fine  trees,  among 
others  the  deodar  and  the  chenar  (plane),  growing  to  a  great 
size.  The  walnut,  too,  was  very  fine ;  the  mulberry,  apricot, 
and  pear  in  profusion,  as  well  as  the  cherry  and  the  inevitable 
pomegranate,  sometimes  loaded  with  fruit,  and  at  others  with 
blossom.  The  Jhelum  is  a  torrent  hereabouts ;  indeed,  for 
miles  it  is  more  than  a  torrent  or  a  rapid,  but  something 
between  a  rapid  and  a  waterfall,  and  this  for  miles.  I  was 
never  tired  of  gazing  at  it,  tumbling  along,  head  over  heela, 
some  twenty  or  thirty  miles  an  hour.     To-morrow,  at  Bin- 


bAram Ola— TEMPLE  of  BHUNIAF.        407 

mula,  I  sliall  see  it  calm  and  quiet,  and  its  surface  glassy  as 
a  mirror ;  at  least,  so  they  tell  me. 

Zd^  Bdramula. — It  is  now  3  p.m.,  and  I  have  been  here 
nearly  fonr  hours,  having  left  Oorun  Boah  at  six  this  morn- 
ing, the  distance  being  thirteen  miles ;  the  road  good  along 
by  the  Jhelum  the  greater  part  of  the  way,  and  well  fornished 
on  both  sides  with  a  variety  of  forest  and  fruit  trees ;  the 
deodar  in  abundance,  sometimes  five  to  six  feet  in  diame- 
ter  five  feet  from  the  ground.  The  walnut  and  the  plane 
(chenar)  both  become  large  trees  here.  I  visited  an  interest- 
ing old  Hindoo  temple  (Bhuniar),  about  three  miles  on  the 
road  from  Oorun  Boah.  Although  the  stone  of  which  it  is 
built  is  much  worn  by  weather,  showing  it  to  be  very  old, 
the  building  itself  is  otherwise  pretty  nearly  intact.  The 
entrance  is  through  an  imposing  archway  into  a  quadrangle, 
about  35  by  45  yards  in  extent,  surrounded  by  a  wall 
some  15  feet  in  height,  in  which  there  are  arranged  some 
sixty  niches,  or  perhaps  cells  might  be  the  proper  term  for 
them,  as  they  are  too  large  to  be  called  niches.  These  cells 
are  separated  from  each  other  by  pillars,  with  base  and 
capital,  perhaps  14  inches  in  diameter.  In  the  centre  of  the 
qnadrangle  is  the  temple,  with  a  fiight  of  fourteen  stone 
steps  leading  up  to  the  entrance.  A  priest  unlocked  the 
door  of  this  sanctum,  but  said  it  was  not  usual  for  strangers 
to  go  inside.  I  suppose  the  room  to  be  about  20  feet  square, 
with  a  raised  altar  in  the  centre,  on  which  I  saw  a  horn  and 
a  bell,  and  nothing  more.  I  must  look  out  for  the  history  of 
this  temple  in  some  of  the  numerous  works  that  have  been 
published  about  Kashmir.  A  little  farther  on  the  road,  two 
Sikh  forts  are  seen,  one  on  each  side  of  the  river.  About 
five  miles  before  arriving  at  B&ramula,  the  road  enters  a 
somewhat  extensive  valley  under  rice  cultivation,  and  after 
passing  through  it,  the  road  crosses  a  high  ridge,  from  the 
top  of  which  a  good  view  is  obtained,  in  clear  weather,  of 
a  large  portion  of  the  valley  of  Kashmir.  The  guide-book 
says,  ^^  As  far  as  the  eye  can  reach  is  a  vast  expanse  of 
meadow-land,  with  groves  of  the  stately  poplar."  As  far  as 
my  eye  could  reach  from  the  top  of  the  ridge,  I  saw  little 
else  but  water;  the  valley  seemed  inundated,  and  looked 
very  like  a  fit  place  for  malaria  to  take  up  its  abode.    As  I 


4o8       bARAMOlA— BARGAINED  FOR  A  BOAT. 

descended  from  the  ridge  to  the  restrhonse,  I  passed  Bome 
fields  of  very  wretched-looking  barley.    To  reach  Baramnk 
from  the  rest-house,  the  river  must  be  crossed  by  a  wooden 
bridge  (of  deodar   entirely)  some   180  yards   long.      The 
Jhelum  is  no  longer  noisy ;  it  presents  a  gentle  current  and 
a  glassy  surface  at  last.     B&ramula  is  a  town  of  250  houses, 
all  built  of  an  admixture  of  mud,  stone,  and  timber,  and  most 
of  them  of  either  two  or  three  stories,  but  all  in  a  state  of 
thorough  dilapidation.     I  was  soon  attacked  by  a  bevy  of 
boatmen  seeking  to  convey  me  to  Sreenuggor,  each  with  a 
handful  of  chits  from   travellers  by  whom  they  had  been 
employed  on  other  occasions.     After  looking  at  the  boats, 
I  chose  one,  and  made  a  bargain  to  be  carried  in  it  to  the 
city  for  two  rupees  and  a  half.     The  crew,  who  all  live  in  tlie 
boat,  consists  of  three  men  and   two  women,  who  take 
their  turn  in  tracking  the  boat  up-stream.     So  here  I  am, 
after  finishing  the  land  part  of  my  journey  from  Lahore  to 
the  capital  of  Kashmir,  to  be  finished  up  by  an  eighteen 
hours'  trip  on  the  Jhelum,  and  through  one  or  two  caoak, 
and  across  Lake  Wulla.     I  might  go  hence  to  Sreenuggnr  by 
land,  two  stages  of  fourteen  and  seventeen  miles,  but  I  have 
preferred  the  water  route,  though  I  am  threatened  to  be  de- 
voured by  mosquitoes  in  passing  through  the  canal  part  rf 
the  journey.     To-day,  for  the  first  time  since  I  left  Murreei 
a  fresh  breeze  of  wind  is  blowing  from  the  north ;  thenno- 
meter  86°.     This  place  my  aneroid  makes  about  5400  feet 
above  the  sea,  being  about  300  feet  higher  than  Oorun  Boah, 
which  I  left  this  morning.     The  Jhelum  takes  its  rise  some- 
where up  the  valky  about  sixty  miles  from  this.     It  widen* 
out  here ;  and  immediately  above  the  bridge  it  must  be  good 
300  yards  across.     The  bridge  over  the  Jhelum,  which  I 
have  before  me  as  I  write,  is,  they  say,  146  yards  long  and 
16   feet   broad.      The  piers,  of  which  there  are  six,  are 
constructed  of  logs  of  deodar,  laid  one  across  the  other  at 
right  angles,  each  layer  being  broader  than  the  previous  one^ 
and  the  whole  structure  fastened  together  by  treenails.    Ibe 
piers  are  kept  in  their  places  by  being  well  ballasted,  and 
are  connected  together  by  long  stout  logs  of  deodar,  laid 
two  feet  apart.     The  platform  or  roadway  over  the  bridge 
consists  of  rough  planks  placed  close  together  diagonallj; 


bAramOla  to  SREENUGGUR.  409 

from  the  centre  to  the  sides,  and  fastened  by  treenails. 
The  roadway  is  somewhat  higher  in  the  centre  than  at  the 
aides,  and  is  very  unpleasant  to  travel  over.  The  average 
depth  of  water  in  the  Jhelnm  where  the  bridge  is  built,  they 
say,  is  tweniy-fonr  feet 

CicA,  SreeTtuggur. — ^At  7  a.m.  on  the  4th  we  started  from 
B&ramnla  in  a  boat  manned  by  two  men^  a  boy,  and  two 
women,  a  little  girl  six  years  old,  and  two  infants,  who, 
the  father  was  careful  to  inform  me,  had  both  been  born  on 
the  same  day,  and  on  board  the  boat.     One  of  the  twins 
was  not  quite  well,  and  cried  a  good  deal,  and  could  only 
be  quieted  by  a  dip  every  now  and  then  in  the  river.    It 
took  ns  six  hours  nearly  to  reach  Soopor,  a  town  about  the 
sise  of  B&ramula ;  and  half  an  hour  after  passing  Soopor  we . 
entered  the  Wulla  Lake,  and  there  we  passed  through  some 
thousands  of  acres  of  the  water-lily  and  the  zinghara,  mixed 
up  with  other  aquatic  plants.     From  Wulla  Lake  we  entered 
a  canal  on  the  south  side  of  the  lake,  and  found  the  country 
flooded  for  some  miles,  and  villages  and  clusters  of  houses 
evefywhere  surrounded  by  water,  and^  in  some  instances,  the 
flood  had  entered  the  cottages,  and  shared  possession  with 
the  rightful  owner.     Horned  cattle  and  horses  were  there  in 
abundance.     The  flood,  I  was  told  by  the  boatmen,  covered 
thousands  of  acres,  that  last  year  were  under  rice,  in  place  of 
being  under  water,  as  now.     Great  damage  must  be  the  re- 
sulty  I  should  think.      Fortunately  the  valley  is  pretty  much 
on  a  level  where  this  flooding  has  taken  place,  consequently 
the  water  spreads  over  a  large  surface,  and  in  no  one  part 
is  there  much  current  running.     Passing  from  this  flooded 
part  of  the  valley  we  entered  the  Noroo  Canal,  where  the 
water  was  within  bounds;  and  just  at  nightfall  we  arrived 
at  Shadipore,  a  small  village  on  the  Jhelum,  and  remained 
there  untU  daybreak  next  morning,  when  we  again  com- 
menced moving  up-stream  by  tracking.     On  the  banks  of  the 
Jhelum  we  proceeded  by  tracking — the  mother  of  the  twins 
occasionally  taking  her  turn  at  the  work,  assisting  or  re- 
lieving one  of  the  men.    An  old  woman,  the  mother  of  the 
owner  of  the  boat,  steered  with  a  paddle  during  the  whole 
journey.     Through  the  lake  and  over  the  flooded  country  we 
progressed  by  poling ;  the  paddles  served  only  in  deep  water. 


4IO  SREENUGGUR. 

when  we  had  to  traverse  the  river  in  order  to  find  a  bank 
upon  which  the  trackers  conid  walk.     Trees  innnmerable 
appeared  to  be  growing  ont  of  the  water ;  and  among  othen^ 
we  passed  numbers  of  beantifol  isolated  specimens  of  the 
chenar'  or  plane,  which  flourishes  wonderfully  in  this  vallej, 
growing  to  a  great  height,  and  covering  a  large  extent  of 
ground  with  its  branches;  the  trunk  five  or  six  feet  from  the 
ground  measuring  eight  to  ten  feet  in  diameter.     The  mol- 
berry  and  the  pear  tree  also  grow  larger  and  finer  here  thto 
I  have  ever  seen  them  elsewhere.    At  11.30  ▲.]!.,  or  in  aboot 
six  hours  after  leaving  Shadipore,  we  drew  up  at  the  post- 
office  of  Sreenuggur,  the  capital  of  Kashmir. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

iraggur,  capital  of  Kaahmir— Guide-books*  opinions  ver^  flowery— Throne  of 
SolomoD-^-Old  templee — Lingam  with  serpents — Persian  inscriptions — Temper- 
ature delightful— Quaint  city — No  wheelea  vehicles — An  officer  to  take  care  of 
foragners— Great  hospitali^  of  the  Maharajah — Free  bungalows  for  Tisitors— 
Four  legalised  routes— Provisions  cheap— Shooting,  fishing,  and  flirting — Origin 
of  Kashmir  shawl-pattem— WeU-timbered  land— Miles  of  orchards— Pandrut- 
ton — Hindoo  temple— Shawl-shop— The  city  a  jumble  of  houses,  dirty  streets- 
Hindoo  temples— Mosques— Hie  Govemment  is  Hindoo — Population,  Maho- 
metans and  Hindoos — Manufactoir  of  shawls  crowded  and  stinking — New  bacaar 
—Works  in  gold  and  silver — Labour  cheap— Fort  Hurri  Purbut- Apple-tree 
Canal — Ruins  of  the  Akhom— Shah  Hamza— Rock  dedicated  to  Vishnu — Great 
moaque  of  Shah  Jehan— Old  ruins— Dul  or  City  Lake — Lotus  and  other  plants  in 
flower — Shawl-washing— Kraleegur  built  on  islands — Ruined  mosque— Tomb- 
Floating  gardens  of  melons  and  cucumbers— Husrutbal ;  the  mosoue  has  a  hair 
of  the  Prophet's  beard— Grove  of  plane-trees— Shalimar  Bagh  gardens— The  zen- 
ana— Nnsseb  Bagh  gardens — Wonderful  tree  vegetation — Origin  of  the  valley- 
No  rice,  no  man— The  Badsh&h  the  noblest  ruin  in  the  city — The  Maharajah 
owns  all  the  land ;  lets  for  cultivation,  and  gets  lion's  share — He  turns  tombs 
of  his  predecessors  into  storehouses— Old  mosque  going  to  ruin — Caterpillars 
turned  into  wood — New  palace— Ruins— Statues— Lingam— A  word  to  the 
**  waather-wise" — MrGIaisner — Great  flea  nation — ^The  Musjid  built  by  Nour- 
mahal,  the  Light  of  the  Harem,  now  a  rioe-store — Mahometan  mosques  turned  into 
bania  by  Hiodoos— Manusbul  Lake  ;  very  large  lotus— Ruins  of  palace,  garden, 
and  temple — The  fakir  preparing  his  grave — Palhallan  to  Gulmuig  on  ponies — 
Pitched  tent— Visitors*  tents  on  the  Mils— Sanatorium — Description  in  guide- 
booka,  author's  description— EngUsh  Church,  chaplain,  doctor,  and  commissioner 
under  Indian  Government— Brown  and  black  bears  —Himalayas,  noble  scenery — 
Bad  weather^  no  church,  no  bell,  but  fowling-piece  fired— Birds— A  gleam  of 
innahine — Grave  for  a  white  child  near  authors  tent— Funeral — Postman— Ma- 
cam — Tree  with  three  legs — Magnificent  trees— The  Kashmirian,  his  character 
hr  Hoorcroft ;  byauthor— The  present  Maharajah  ahumane  man — Fierce  storm — 
No  fleaa — Cholera— Barley-treading  byoxen— Colonel  Gardner — Islamabad — Iron 
mines  of  Ch&r— Smelting-fumaces— Pundo  ruins— Cheap  pottery— Meat,  be«t 
hind-quarters— Hindoo  temple  and  Lingams — Bronze  god— Bronze  bull — Great 
rain  of  Bfattun— Holy  spring  of  Kashmir — Holy  fish— Pilgrims— Garden  of  Sir- 
kari — Noisy  women,  not  very  lovely ;  dress,  ornaments — Rent  of  fishing-nt>und 
—Hindoo  itorv — Springs  at  Aitchibul — Caves  of  Bhoomjoo ;  myriads  of  oats — 
Temnle  and  Lingam — Islamabad;  Cholera  very  bad ;  prayers  ordered — Duty  paid 
on  snawb — Army — Doongah,  or  traveller's  boat ;  other  boats— Death  of  the 
Kotwal's  wife  of  cholera— Flooded  paddy-fields — Road  lined  with  pear  and  apple 
trees — Aliabad  Serai — Fine  scenery — Limestone  hills — Barramguia  in  dominion 
of  Rajah  Motee  Sing— Thunna  Mundi— Bullocks  laden  with  salt  for  Kashmir- 
Temple  and  Lingam— Rampore— Leaving  Kashmir- Found  money-changer- 
Cemetery  of  native  kings — Thunderstorm— Chungus— Difficulty  in  road— Mogul 
■erai — river  Tawi—Woncers  in  gold  and  silver— Road  lined  with  pomegranates— 
OooUes  unsatisfactory- Sardabad — Bhimbur,  last  stage  in  Kashmir— Transfer  of 
Kaahmir  to  the  Maharajah  Golab  Sing. 

6M. — Here  I  found  three  packets  of  letters  forwarded 
m  Calcutta  and  Lahore,  and  in  ten  minutes  afterwards  we 
ched  a  bungalow,  the  lower  part  of  which  had  only  just 
jn  vacated  by  a  traveller ;  so  we  took  possession  of  it. 


412  G  UWE'BOOKS—EXA  GGERA  TIONS. 

The  guide-book,  in  describing  this  trip  by  water  from  Btit- 
mula  to  Sreennggnr,  says,  ^^The  passage  np  the  Jhelnm 
is  most  delightful;   the  soft  balmy  air,  the  broad  smootk 
glassy  river,  the  rich  and  cultivated  fields,  and,  above  aD, 
the  grand   and  snowy  mountains  which  entirely  surrouid 
the  beautiful  valley,  must  be  felt  or  seen  to  be  folly  ^pn- 
ciated."     Another  guide-book  says,  ^^  There  is  somethiii; 
peculiarly  pleasant  in  this  mode  of  locomotion ;  the  phdd 
bright  face  of  the  silent  river,  the  quiet  and  calm  ^  the 
scene  on  every  side,  silence  scarcely  broken  by  any  souid 
beyond  the  gentle  rippling  of  the  water  against  the  sides  of 
the  boat ;  all  combine  to  create  a  feeling  of  happy  pleasnN 
able  repose,  in  strange  contrast  to  the  rough  and  Boble 
grandeur  of  the  scenery  just  left  behind ;  a  sudden  chaDge, 
indeed,  from  the  stupendous  mountains  just  crossed,  and  tUi 
glistening  quiet  river  now  being  traversed     How  difeeot 
from  the  turbulent  rushing  torrent  the  traveller  has  known 
it  to  be,  whilst,  up  to  this,  following  its  mountain  course!*' 
Did  I  realise  all  this  ?    Well,  the  air  was  soft  enough,  off- 
tainly,  not  a  breath  stirring,  and  the  thermometer  i^  VS 
under  our  mat  awning,  that  covered  two-thirds  of  the  botl 
The  Jhelum  is  broad  enough  and  glassy  enough  (not  a  bratk 
of  air  stirring,  as  I  said  before),  but  the  water  was  voy 
muddy.     There  can  be  no  doubt  at  all  about  the  quality  of 
the  soil,  for  the  whole  valley,  ninety  miles  long,  with  an 
average  breadth  of  eighteen  miles,  is  believed  to  have  been 
at  one  time  a  lake,  so  that  the  soil  is  all  alluvial ;  bat  the 
cultivation  is  bad,  and  the  crops  that  I  saw,  barley  and 
natural   grasses,  wretched  in  the  extreme.     Some  of  the 
rice  crops  that  I  met  with  in  my  journeys  on  horsebadc 
had  the  appearance  of  nice  cultivation,  and  I  suppose  there 
must  be  some  part  of  the  valley  under  rice  at  this  moment, 
but  I  did  not  see  it     But  who  can  see,  from  the  deck  of  a 
very  low  boat,  all  the  crops  that  might  be  growing  on  a 
thoroughly  flat  surface  on  each  side  of  a  river  he  is  travel- 
ling on  ?    To  my  mind,  a  great  part  of  this  transit  by  water 
from  B&ramula  to  Sreenuggur,  so  far  as  river  scenery  is 
concerned,  is  no  better  than  what  one  sees  upon  the  Nile; 
and  who  ever  heard  the  Nile  praised  for  its  scenery?     It 
is  true  the  valley  of  Kashmir  is  encompassed  by  mountains 


TUKHT I  SULJMAN,  OR  THRONE  OF  SOLOMON.  413 

from  five  to  fifteen  thousand  feet  high,  and  there  is  a  good 
sprinklmg  of  fair-sized  trees  on  the  plains ;  but  trees  don't 
tell  for  much  when  they  are  growing  on  a  flat,  and  are  only 
seen  edgeways  from  the  deck  of  a  very  low  boat    And  as  for 
monntains,  why,  the  whole  time  occupied  by  my  trip,  they 
were  partially  covered  by  mist,  and  I  never  saw  their  outline 
from  the  time  I  started  from  Baramula  until  I  reached 
Breennggur ;  and  as  for  any  snow  upon  them,  I  could  put 
into  my  hat  all  that  I  saw.   And  then  the  ^^  feeling  of  happy 
and  pleasurable  repose/'  which  this  sort  of  quiet  locomotion 
is  said  to  produce,  is,  to  my  mind,  more  ideal  than  real. 
In  fact,  there  is  no  great  repose  in  this  mode  of  travelling 
at  alL     You  ore  cognisant  that  you  are  forced  along,  against 
a  three  to  four  knot  current,  at  the  rate  of  from  two  to  three 
mflea  an  hour  over  the  ground,  poling  or  tracking,  as  it  may 
be,  by  the  united  strength  of  three  or  four  poor  fellows,  who 
dtfe  not  relax  their  e£forts  for  a  moment  or  their  labour  would 
be  in  vain;  and  all  this  exertion,  kept  up  for  the  best  part  of 
two  days,  is  paid  for  by  a  shilling  to  each  man  and  woman ! 
I  can  understand  that  pleasurable  emotions  are  frequently 
produced  when,  with  the  tiller  in  your  own  hand,  you  are 
gliding,  it  may  be  gently,  over  a  placid  sea  in  a  sailing-boat 
with  just  wind  enough  to  set  your  sails  asleep :  that  I  can 
understand;  but  that  any  mortal   man  ever  experienced  a 
'^  feeling  of  pleasurable  and  happy  repose  "  whilst  being  sub- 
jected to  the  process  of  being  tracked  or  poled  along  at  the 
rate  of  two  miles  an  hour  over  the  ground,  against  a  current 
of  three  knots,  at  the  cost  of  a  considerable  amount  of  human 
strength  and  su£fering,  with  the  thermometer  in  the  shade 
standing  at  90"",  I  don't  for  a  moment  believe.     To  me,  the 
joorn^  was  dull  and  wearisome,  and  I  was  very  glad  when 
it  came  to  an  end. 

Itk. — ^This  morning  before  breakfast  I  ascended  the  Tukht 
I  Soliman,  or  Throne  of  Solomon.  Its  elevation  by  my  aneroid 
is  about  6250  feet  above  the  sea,  and  above  the  city  I  make 
it  only  about  700  feet  The  former  agrees  with  what  I  have 
seen  elsewhere  stated,  but  the  latter  is  300  and  odd  feet  less. 
To  the  foot  of  this  hill  is  about  ten  minutes'  walk  from  my 
bungalow,  and  then  begins  the  ascent  by  stone  steps,  some 
800  of  them.  Following  on,  you  meet  with  two  short  stretches 


414  TUKHT  I  SULIMAN. 

of  level  gronnd,  and  a  steep  bit  at  the  end  lands  yon  at  the  foot 
of  a  temple  called  by  the  Hindoos  Shankur  Ck&rak^  and  whid 
is  supposed  to  have  been  built  200  years  before  the  Christiu 
era.     It  stands  upon  a  base  of  natural  rock  and  of  solid  stone 
masonry,  from  which  a  flight  of  steps  leads  up  to  an  octagooal 
base,  surrounded  by  an  elaborately-worked  stone  balustrade^ 
and  upon  which  the  temple  itself  stands.     This  octagonal  bm 
is  paved  with  stone  to  a  width  of  about  9  feet  all  round  tb 
outside*      The  temple  itself  appears  much  older  than  tb 
steps  that  lead  to  it.     The  interior  is  a  circular  chamber  14 
feet  in   diameter;  the  roof  is  flat,  11  feet   high,  andsq)- 
ported  by  four  octagonal  limestone  columns.     In  the  centre 
of  the   floor   or    chamber    is   a    quadrangular  stone  jdat- 
form  1  foot  high,  5|   long,  and  ^  feet  broad.      It  supparti 
a  Lingam  of  polished  black  stone,  around  which  is  ouned 
a  coiled  serpent.      The  Lingam  is  18  inches  high,  and  2} 
feet  in  circumference.      It  stands  in*  the  midst  of  a  slights- 
raised   basin,    2  feet  in  diameter,  on  the  northern  side  of 
which  is  a  narrow  channel  to  convey  the  fluids  poured  OTer 
the  Lingam  into  a  cemented  trough  below.     On  one  of  the 
two  pillars  on  the  left  hand  are  two  inscriptions  in  Feniin; 
that  upon  the  front  of  the  pillar  states  that  this  idol,  or  Bit, 
was  made  by  Haji  Hashti,  a  son&r,  in  the  year  54  of  the 
Samut  or  Hindoo  era,  or  about  1780  years  ago;  whilst  thit  at 
the  foot  of  the  back  part  of  the  same  pillar  states  that  he  wlio 
raised  up  this  idol  was  Quajah  Rukm,  son  of  Mirjan,  in  theyetr 

.     The  remainder  of  the  inscription  is  below  the  pife- 

ment,  and  cannot  be  made  out.  From  the  summit  of  this  hill 
an  extensive  view  is  obtained  in  clear  weather  over  a  great  ptrt 
of  the  valley  of  Kashmir,  and  a  very  good  bird's-eye  view  of 
the  city  of  Sreenuggur  itself  and  its  immediate  sunound- 
ings.  In  the  direction  of  the  highest  mountains,  the  atmos- 
phere was  clear  of  mist,  and  certainly  the  sunmiits  of  them 
for  a  good  long  stretch  had  much  more  snow  on  them  than 
I  could  hold  in  my  hat,  and  it  looked  to  me  as  if  the  snov 
had  recently  fallen.  According  to  my  aneroid,  Sreenuggv 
stands  about  5500  feet  above  sea-level.  The  thermometer 
this  morning  stood  at  G?"",  and  now,  at  3  p.m.,  it  marks  ?2^ 
Looking  at  this  valley  from  the  top  of  Solomon's  Throne,  so 
vaunted  as  it  is  for  its  great  beauty,  I  could  see  nothing  thst 


VALLEY  FROM  TOP  OF  SOLOMON'S  THRONE.    41S 

Btrack  me  as  very  remarkable.  One-third  of  that  part  of 
the  yalley  that  came  within  reach  of  my  sight  was  covered 
with  water.  The  number  of  trees  dotted  about  the  valley  was 
fewer  in  number  than  I  had  before  believed,  and  there  was  no 
richness  in  the  appearance  of  the  crops.  The  long  rank  grass, 
which  covers  so  much  of  the  valley,  looked  very  brown,  and 
though  doubtless  there  is  a  good  deal  of  timber  on  the  slopes 
of  some  of  the  mountains,  yet  there  are  many  on  which  there 
IB  very  little  or  none  at  all ;  although,  where  this  is  the  case, 
broBhwood  or  grass  abound,  and  give,  at  any  rate,  a  green 
oorering  to  theuL  As  for  the  outline  of  the  mountains,  I  see 
no  very  striking  or  remarkable  peaks  among  them ;  and  as 
for  the  trifle  of  snow  there  is  now  to  be  seen,  why,  I  have 
been  so  used  to  snow,  have  lived  so  much  amongst  it,  and 
have  seen  it  so  often  covering  some  of  the  highest  and  some 
of  the  most  picturesquely-shaped  mountains  in  the  world,  that 
I  am  not  much  impressed  by  what  I  see  here  among  the  Hima- 
layas. So  far  I  begin  to  suspect  that  the  valley  of  Kash- 
mir owes  its  great  reputation  for  beauty  more  to  its  proxi- 
mity to  the  parched  plains  of  India  than  to  any  real  beauty 
which  it  possesses  in  itself  beyond  what  one  may  meet  with 
in  a  hundred  different  parts  of  the  world ;  and  it  is  no  wonder 
if  it  be  so.  Tes ;  the  real  beauty,  the  real  worth  of  the 
place,  is  in  its  climate.  Now,  for  example,  whilst  the  ther- 
mometer is  standing  here  at  ^T^  nowhere  on  the  plains  of 
India  is  it  below  90"",  and  in  many  places  over  100^  It  is  this 
principally  that  makes  the  valley  of  Kashmir  so  lovely  in 
Indian  eyes.  It  is  a  quaint  place,  too,  this  Kashmir,  and  this 
may  help  to  make  it  attractive.  In  this  country  there  is  no 
sndi  thing  as  a  wheeled  vehicle,  simply  because  there  are  no 
roads  adapted  for  wheeled  vehicles  to  travel  over.  Indeed,  the 
great  bulk  of  the  traffic  throughout  the  valley  is  carried  on 
upon  my  very  old  friend  the  Jhelum,  and  upon  its  tributaries, 
upon  whose  bosom  you  might  count  at  times,  between  Bar- 
amola  and  Sreenuggur,  thousands  of  boats — cargo-boats, 
passenger-boats,  ferry-boats,  and  occasionally  pleasure-boats, 
generally  covered  over  with  a  mat  awning,  but  not  one  of 
them  with  a  shred  of  a  sail  I — all  propelled  by  paddles,  by 
poling,  or  by  tracking.  Doubtless  there  is  a  good  deal  of 
originality  about  Kashmir.     For  example,  there  is  an  officer 


4i6     THE  BABOO— THE  CIVIL  OFFICER  ON  DUTY. 

here  at  Sreenuggnr  appointed  by  the  Maharajah  to  look  after 
and  take  care  of  foreigners  when  they  first  arrive.    This  good 
man  called  on  me  an  hour  after  I  had  taken  possession  of 
half  a  bungalow  (which  I  did  without  asking  anybody's  pe^ 
mission),  and  proffered  his  services  in  any  way  he  could  be  of 
use  to  me ;  and  soon  after  he  left,  I  received  from  him  a  pres- 
ent of  fruit,  cherries  and  white  mulberries,  which  I  am  toU 
is  to  be  repeated  daily  so  long  as  I  remain;  and  in  the 
course  of  the  day,  half-a-dozen  coolies  made  their  appearaooe 
from  the  same  gentleman,  bearing  along  a  supply  of  rice, 
ghee,  butter,  sngar,  flour,  salt  and  pepper,  tea,  milk,  wood, 
and  a  live  sheep — sufficient  to  keep  me  and  my  servants  for 
several  days ;  and  this  is  to  be  repeated,  I  am  told,  on  the  ere 
of  my  departure ;  and  in  all  this  I  am  only  receiving  the 
common  civility  dealt  out  by  this  representative  of  the  Maht- 
rajah  to  every  mortal  white  child  of  Adam  that  comes  on  s 
visit  into  Kashmir. 

There  are  some  twenty  or  more  bungalows  here  on  the 
right  bank  of  the  Jhelum,  for  the  most  part  standing  in 
orchards,  some  meant  for  married  couples,  and  others  for 
bachelors.  There  are  two  rows  of  them,  in  fact,  all  built  by 
the  Maharajah,  entirely  and  exclusively  for  the  accommods- 
tion  of  European  visitors  to  Sreenuggnr,  and  for  which  no 
rent  is  either  expected  or  charged.  In  fact,  nothing  is 
charged  even  for  the  accommodation  received  at  any  of  the 
bungalows  to  be  found  at  intervals  of  from  ten  to  fifteen 
miles  on  all  the  four  legalised  routes  for  coming  into  Kash- 
mir from  British  India.  They  are  all  built  at  the  expense 
of  the  Maharajah,  and  no  charge  is  made  for  them. 
Travelling,  too,  is  cheap.  Eggs,  butter,  milk,  and  chickens 
are  all  to  be  had  at  every  bungalow  as  cheap  as  in  Asia 
Minor,  and  wages  are  quite  as  low  here  as  in  India.  Ton 
must  bear  in  mind,  however,  that  these  free  bungalows  are 
not  houses  replete  with  comforts.  The  one  I  am  in  now  msj 
be  taken  as  a  type  of  the  whole  lot  It  is  a  square  two- 
storied  building  of  mud,  with  a  little  timber  as  framework, 
the  better  to  hold  the  mud  together.  It  is  raised  from  the 
ground  upon  a  stone  base  some  four  feet  high ;  and  both 
floors  are  composed  of  our  mother  earth,  and  so  full  of  hills 
and  hollows  that  no  chair  or  table  ever  yet  made  could  be 


BUNGALOWS  AT  SREENUGGUR,  417 

induced  to  stand  steady  upon  them,  unless  by  much  more 

than  ordinary  management  and  manoeuvring  on  the  part  oT 

the  operator,  who,  in  any  case,  must  be  a  genius  to  have  any 

chance  of  succeeding.     Each  floor  contains  four  rooms,  the 

largest  18  by  14  feet,  the  other  three  15  by  0,  and  they 

may  be  8  feet  in  height      They  have  no  windows,  but 

extensive  lattice-work  openings,  which  are  in  divisions,  and 

movable,  with  a  covering  of  oil-paper,  intended  to  keep  out 

prying  eyes,  and  dust  and  sun.     There  are  doors,  such  as 

they  are,  to  some  of  the  rooms,  but  no  fastenings  to  any  of 

them,  not  even  to  the  outer  door,  should  there  happen  to  be 

one,  which  is  not   always  the  case.     The  upper  story  is 

reached  by  steps  starting  from  a  square  passage  just  outside 

the  entrance  to  the  lower  rooms.    The  building  is  covered 

with  a  pent  roof,  manufactured  of  an  admixture  of  wood  and 

mud,  neither  wind  nor  water  tight,  and  usually  covered  by 

some  sort  of  weed  growing  on  the  top  of  it     There  is  neither 

a  parallel  nor  a  straight  line,  nor  a  level  bit,  in  the  whole 

structure,  nor  an  inch  of  wall  not  many  degrees  out  of  the 

perpendicular.    The  whole  building  is  of  the  very  roughest 

construction;  it  looks  as  if  it  had  tumbled  up  ^^ anyhow," 

and  seems  also  ready  to  tumble  down  at  any  moment    This 

is  the  sort  of  building  that  the  Maharajah  has  constructed  at 

the  city  of  Sreenuggur,  on  the  banks  of  the  Jhelum,  for 

visitors  to  the  famous  valley  of  Kashmir,  and  for  which,  we 

must  not  forget,  no  rent  is  demanded.     There  are  some 

twentyHBix  of  these  two-story  mud  edifices,  all  in  a  line,  on 

the  banks  of  the  Jhelum,  many  of  them  standing  in  orchards, 

and  all  of  them,  once  or  twice  during  the  season,  subject  to 

a  freshet  from  the  river.    They  are  placed  at  twenty  to  fifty 

yards  apart    The  visitor,  on  arrival,  takes  possession  of  any 

bungalow,  or,  if  he  be  a  bachelor,  any  half  bungalow,  he  may 

find  empty ;  and  empty  they  may  all  be  truly  said  to  be,  for 

they  never  contain  one  single  article  of  furniture  of  any 

description ;  but  what  he  vdll  find  they  contain  in  abundance 

are  myriads  of  hungry  fleas,  and  very  likely  some  other 

small  vermin.     Some  of  the  bungalows  for  married  people 

are,  I  believe,  more  commodious  than  the  one  I  have  just 

described,  but  not  much,  and  equally  guiltless  of  furniture. 

The  bungalows  one  meets  with  en  route  from  British  India 

2d 


4i8  RIVEF  BANK  AT  SREENUGGUR. 

to  the  Happy  Valley  are  decidedly  better  buildings,  and 
frequently  provided  with  a  chair,  a  table,  and  a  charpoy,  or 
stretcher,  to  sleep  on,  in  every  r6om.  In  return  for  this  oat- 
lay  in  bungalows,  Kashmir  has  the  benefit  of  an  annual  ex- 
penditure by  foreign  visitors  of  from  £50,000  to  £100,000 
sterling.  So  far,  in  this  season,  there  have  been  about 
360  visitors  to  Kashmir.  The  season  lasts  from  15th  April 
to  15th  October,  and  all  are  expected  to  have  cleared  out  by 
the  latter  date.  Shooting  and  fishing,  and,  I  may  perhaps 
add,  the  opportunity  of  doing  a  little  flirting,  are  the  prin- 
cipal inducements  to  young  officers  to  visit  Kashmir,  besides 
the  climate.  Married  men,  in  bringing  their  wives  with  them, 
sometimes  have  other  objects,  in  which,  I  am  told,  tiiey  not 
unfrequently  succeed. 

^th — Took  a  long  walk  on  the  bank  of  the  river  up-stream 
this  morning  before  breakfast,  and  passed  one  or  two  married 
bungalows,  apparently  of  much  better  quality  than  the  bulk 
of  them.  Examined  some  pretty  fair  barley,  now  crying  out, 
"  Come  and  cut  me  I  "  tumbling  out  of  ear.  He  river  ^eiy 
quiet,  flowing  along  about  two  miles  an  hour,  but  very 
muddy.  It  is  so  tortuous,  particularly  in  that  part  where 
they  say  the  twists  and  turns  gave  the  first  idea  of  the  cele- 
brated Kashmirian  shawl-pattern,  that,  after  walking  aloDg 
by  it  for  more  than  an  hour,  I  was  still  almost  close  enoagh 
to  pitch  a  stone  upon  the  point  I  started  from.  The  walk 
all  the  way  was  particularly  well  timbered.  I  met  with  some 
fine  plane-trees  six  to  seven  feet  in  diameter  (there  is  one 
somewhere  in  the  neighbourhood  thirty-three  feet  in  circum- 
ference). Orchards  of  pear,  apple,  and  mulberry  treei 
extend  for  miles  along  the  right  bank  of  the  river,  and  it  is 
in  these  orchards  the  visitors'  bungalows  are  built  Poplars, 
and  very  fine  ones  too,  are  mixed  up  with  the  plane  and 
other  trees,  besides  in  many  places  growing  alone,  forming 
avenues,  and  intertwined  with  the  grape-vine,  the  fruit  of 
which,  they  say,  is  very  fine.  The  morning  was  bright, 
though  pleasantly  cool ;  and  I  must  Bay  the  country  in  my 
inmiediate  neighbourhood  struck  me  as  interesting,  notwith- 
standing its  perfect  flatness. 

11^^. — ^Yesterday  before  breakfast  I  walked  to  the  village 
of  Pandruttun,  up-stream   about  three   miles,  and  there  I 


A  WALK  THROUGH  SREENUGGUjR.  4^9 

visited  a  small  Hindoo  temple,  standing  in  what  was  once  a 
tank,  now  to  all  appearance  a  small  swamp,  eighteen  ii^ches 
deep  in  water,  and  coyered  with  tall  reeds.     It  is  thns  de- 
scribed in  Dr  Ince's  gaide-book :  "  The   temple,  built  of 
stone,  is  pyramidal  in  shape,  and  each  side  is  fifteen  feet 
broad,  and  has  a  trefoiled  arched  opening ;  the  interior  .is 
hollow,  and  the  inner  surface  of  its  roof  is  most  elaborately 
carved  and  ornamented."    In  this  walk  I  saw  some  wonder- 
fally  fine  plane-trees,  beating  those  I  noticed  as  having  met 
with  yesterday  both  in  height  and  girth.    Many  of  the  oldest 
and  largest  trees  have  been  most  unmercifully  lopped :  where 
this  has  not  been  the  case,  the  branches,  extend  a  long  way 
horizontally,  and  form,  where  they  are  in  rows,  fine  shady 
walks.    After  breakfast,  walked  to  Summud  Shaw's  shawl- 
shop.    This  walk  took  me  through  a  great  part  of  the  city ; 
and  what  a  city  it  is  I    It  may  be  said  to  consist  of  a  jumble 
of  20,000  houses,  lining  the  banks  of  the  Jhelum,  of  from 
three  to  four  stories  high,  windowless  all  of  them,  very  firagile- 
looking,  built  for  the  most  part  of  mud,  with  a  very  slight 
framework  of  wood,  with  pent  roofs  overlaid  with  earth,  and 
covered  now  with  growing  grass  and  other  plants.  They  all  lean 
anyhow,  no  two  lines  in  a  building  ever  being  found  parallel, 
and  ready  to  tumble  down  at  a  moment's  notice.    The  streets, 
with  few  exceptions,  are  very  narrow  and  tortuous,  and  most 
disgustingly  dirty.    A  few  of  them,  and  only  a  few,  are  paved 
with  very  rough  stones.     Intermixed  with  these  wretched 
buildings  are  a  few  better-looking  houses  belonging  to  the 
principal  merchants,  and  some  few,  more  pretentious,  in 
course  of  construction ;  and  many  Hindoo  temples,  generally 
small  places  (the  Gk)vemment  is  Hindoo),  and  many  mosques. 
They  say  the  last  census,  if  there  was  ever  one  taken  to  be 
relied  on — which  may  be  much  doubted — gave  a  population 
of  20,000  Hindoos  and  130,000  Mahometans.     I  have  been  • 
down  the  river  to-day  in  a  boat.     One  might  almost  say 
that  wherever  they  could  get  a  footing,  that  is,  where  stone, 
brick,  or  mud  walls  do  not  reach  quite  down  to  the  river, 
women  were  to.  be  seen  employed  in  washing  clothes,  and 
young  children,  and  some  older  ones  too,  were  bathing.     The 
city  extends  for  about  two  miles  on  both  sides  of  the  river. 
They  say  the  banks  of  the  Jhelum,  as  far  as  the  city  extends, 


420  MANUFACTORY  OF  SNA  WLS—HURRI  PURBVT. 

bad  formerly  alining  of  stone  (large  blocks  of  limestone), Vot 
I  confess  I  saw  no  remains  of  snch  a  stmctnre.   There  aietbe 
remains  of  what  were,  doubtless,  at  one  time  ghats  or  fligbtiof 
stone  steps  leading  from  the  river  np  into  the  city :  they  are 
numerous,  and  now  so  dilapidated  that  you  momit  up  them 
at  the  risk  of  your  limbs.     I  visited  to-day  a  manufactory  of 
the  famous  Kashmir  shawls,  a  long,  low,  crowded,  stinkiDg 
room.     The  workpeople,  men  and  boys,  sat  at  their  looms 
naked  from  the  waist  upwards.     The  operation  of  embroider- 
ing was  being  performed,  and  very  slow  work  it  seemed  to 
me  to  be ;  and  the  cloth  they  were  embroidering  was  in  amoit 
filthy  state.     The  workpeople  looked  haggard  and  miserable; 
and  no  wonder,  working  in  such  an  atmosphere :  the  stenck 
was  intolerable.     The  new  bazaar,  occupied  principally  by 
workers  in  gold  and  silver,  forming  a  quadrangle,  is  in  its 
buildings  a  great  improvement  on  the  general  run  of  hoaaes 
in  the  city.     I  saw  some  of  the  jewellers'  work  to-day :  they 
turn  out  some  good  things,  and  work  cheaply.     In  &ct,  eTeiy 
description  of  work  is  cheap  here.    A  boatman  hired  by  the 
month  costs  two  and  a  half  rupees,  or  5b.,  and  for  that  he 
gives  you  the  use  of  his  boat  and  all  his  time  for  a  month; 
and  these  boatmen,  whose  yearly  wages  is  consequently  only 
£3  sterling,  are  stout  strong  fellows :  in  fact,  their  fall  em- 
ployment lasts  only  during  the  visitors'  season,  from  15th 
April  to  15th  October;  after  that  there  must  be  a  dearth  of 
employment  for  them.     At  present,  80  lbs.  of  paddy  can  be 
bought  in  Sreenuggur  for  a  rupee  (2s.),  and  I  am  told  that 
that  quantity  is  sufficient  to  feed  a  man  for  a  montL 

l2tL — This  morning  I  started  to  pay  a  visit  to  the  fort 
of  Hurri  Purbut,  upon  a  hill  two  and  a  half  miles  distant 
from  my  bungalow,  and,  by  my  aneroid,  400  feet  above  the 
Jhelum ;  the  guide-book  calls  it  about  250  feet,  but  I  am 
satisfied  that  must  be  an  error.  The  road  from  the  bungalow 
leads  to  the  bridge  that  spans  the  Apple-tree  Canal,  not  ftr 
from  the  sluice-gates,  and  then  along  a  causeway ;  and  ton- 
ing to  the  right,  through  swampy  cultivated  ground,  it  pasMi 
through  several  small  villages.  The  hill,^  on  the  sununit  of 
which  the  fort  stands,  is  surrounded  by  a  stone  waUy 
built  by  Akbar  about  the  year  1597.  It  is  about  three 
quarters   of  a  mile  in  extent,    28  feet  high,  and  13  M 


SHAH  ITAMZA—JUMMA  MUSJID.  421 

thick,  and  strengthened  by  bastions  at  intervals  of  about 
ifty  yards.  The  entrance  is  through  a  gateway  in  the  wall, 
aJIed  Kattee  Durwaza.  The  fort  is  of  stoue,  consisting  of 
two  wings  placed  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  and  also  a 
separate  square  building  with  a  bastion  at  each  end.  Seen 
from  a  distance,  the  fort  presents  a  formidable  appearance, 
bat  it  contains  nothing  beyond  a  few  huts  used  as  barracks, 
\  couple  of  tanks  filled  with  slimy  water,  and  a  small  Hin- 
loo  temple.  The  only  guns  I  saw  were  half-a-dozen  field- 
pieces,  one  of  which  serves  to  fire  a  midnight  and  a  daylight 
g^im.  The  view  from  the  fort  is  very  much  more  limited 
than  that  from  the  Tukht  I  Suliman.  I  ascended  the  hill 
an  the  southern  side,  and  descended  by  the  northern,  visit- 
bg  in  passing,  on  the  southern  side,  a  fine  old  ruhi  called 
the  Akhorn  MooUah  Shah  Musjid,  after  the  tutor  or  spiritual 
g;oide  of  the  Emperor  Gehan  Gir.  To  the  west  is  the  ruin 
of  Shah  Hamza,  of  great  sanctity  among  the  Mahometans. 
On  the  northern  side  of  the  hill,  a  large  and  irregular  mass 
of  rock  has  been  dedicated  by  the  Hindoos  to  Vishnu.  It  is 
oovered  with  red  pigment,  of  which  the  presiding  priest  pre- 
sented me  with  some ;  and  with  this  just  now  every  Hindoo, 
man,  woman,  or  child,  in  Sreenuggur,  have  their  foreheads 
bedaubed.  They  are  the  ruling  people  here ;  and  though  only 
lome  20,000,  whilst  the  Mussulmans  number  some  130,000, 
they  go  about  with  this  distinctive  brand  in  a  sort  of  brag- 
ging way,  but,  nevertheless,  do  not  appear  to  be  molested  by 
the  Mussulmans.  The  Orangemen  in  Ireland  can  hardly  say 
as  much  for  the  forbearance  of  the  Catholics.  In  my  walk 
towards  the  river,  to  return  to  the  bungalow  by  boat,  I  went 
into  the  Jumma  Musjid,  or  great  mosque,  built  by  the 
Emperor  Shah  Jehan.  It  is  a  very  large  quadrangular 
boildingy  with  an  open  square  in  the  centre,  and  a  wooden 
steeple  in  the  middle  of  each  side.  The  roof  of  the  building 
is  supported  by  a  triple  row  of  wooden  pillars,  each  formed 
of  a  single  deodar-tree,  thirty  feet  high,  resting  upon  a  stone 
base.  The  floor  is  paved  with  brick  on  edge.  All  around 
about  this  mosque  are  the  ruins  of  buildings  of  bygone 
ages,  and  extensive  burial-grounds,  containing  many  curious 
monuments.  I  got  into  a  boat  at  the  fifth  bridge  (there  are 
seven  of  them  spailning  the  river,  connecting  the  two  sides 


422  THE  DUL  OR  CITY  LAKE. 

of  the  city,  within  a  distance  of  two  miles),  and  had  a  loDgiA 
paddle  against  the  current  back  to  the  bungalow. 

\ZtK — ^At  seven  this  morning  I  went  off  to  visit  the  DnI 
or  City  Lake.  We  proceeded  down  the  Jhelum  for  about  a 
mile,  and  then  entered,  on  the  right  bank,  the  Sunti  Enl,  or 
Apple-tree  Canal,  as  it  is  called ;  but  it  is  not  a  canal  at  all, 
that  is,  not  artificial,  but  the  natural  outlet  for  the  waters  of 
the  Dul  Lake,  which  flow  in  a  good-sized  stream  for  about  t 
mile,  and  then  enter  the  Jhelum.  The  banks  of  this  stream 
are  thickly  planted  with  trees,  some  of  them  very  fine,  and 
on  its  left  bank  is  a  grove  of  fine  old  chenar  (plane-trees), 
a  favourite  spot  for  encamping,  but  liable  to  be  flooded  when 
the  river  becomes  very  full.  Arrived  at  the  Dul  Lake,  wc 
enter  through  a  pair  of  gates,  usually  open,  but  which  shut  of 
themselves  when  the  river  rises  sufficiently,  that  by  bading 
into  the  lake  an  inundation  of  the  land  around  the  lake  is 
threatened.  Just  now  there  is  a  strong  rush  of  water  from 
the  lake,  and  a  little  care  is  necessary  to  prevent  collisions  be- 
tween the  boats  coming  out  and  those  entering  the  lake.  Tbe 
lake  is  about  five  miles  long  and  two  and  a  half  miles  broad, 
its  average  depth  being  about  ten  feet  The  mountains  on 
the  north  and  east  come  down  close  to  the  margin  of  the  lake. 
On  entering,  we  directed  our  course  towards  the  northern  side, 
and  paddling  along  through  a  coating  of  lotus  and  ziDgbara 
plants — the  latter  with  the  nut  well  advanced  towards  ripeness, 
and  the  former  with  a  good  sprinkling  of  large  and  band- 
some  pink  flowers,  some  of  them  eighteen  inches  in  circomfer- 
ence — we  passed  the  spqt,  well  provided  with  large  blocks 
of  stone  from  a  neighbouring  ruin,  to  where  the  &moQS 
Kashmir  shawls  are  brought  from  the  loom  to  be  washed, 
and  soon  after  came  upon  the  village  of  Kraleegur ;  and  so 
tortuous  was  our  course  through  it,  that  it  seemed  as  if  it  were 
built  upon  a  number  of  little  islands,  all  well  studded  with 
timber.  The  whole  thing  was  very  pretty.  Passing  under 
a  bridge  connected  with  a  causeway  that  extends  all  across 
the  lake,  we  came  upon  a  fine  old  ruined  mosque  built  by  tbe 
Shiahs  in  the  time  of  Akbar,  composed  of  brick  and  mortar, 
and  enfaced  within  and  without  with  elaborately-carved  slabs 
of  limestone.  In  a  cemetery  attached  to  the  mosque  are 
many  curious  and   some   highly-wrought  tombs  and  tomb- 


FLOATING  GARDENS.  423 

stones,  with  long  inscriptions  on  many  of  them.     Leaving 
the  rained  mosque,  we  retamed  to  our  boat,  and  were  not 
long  before  we  found  ourselvefl  in  the  midst  of  the  famous 
floating  gardens,  looking  full  of  health,  and  promising  the 
cultivators  fine  crops  of  melons  and  cucumbers.    These  float- 
ing gardens  cover  a  considerable  portion  of  this  part  of  the 
lake.   Thejr  are  formed  in  the  following  manner,  according  to 
Moorcroft :  ^^  The  roots  of  aquatic  plants  growing  in  shallow 
places  are  divided  about  two  feet  under  the  water,  so  that  they 
completely  lose  all  connection  with  the  bottom  of  the  lake, 
bat  retain    their  former  position  in  respect   to  each  other. 
When  thus  detached  from  the  soil,  they  are  pressed  into 
somewhat  closer  contact,  and  formed  into  beds  of  about  two 
yards  in  breadth,  and  of  an  indefinite  lengths    The  heads  of  the 
sedges,  reeds,  and  other  plants,  are  now  cut  off,  and  laid  upon 
its  surface,  and  covered  with  a  thin  coat  of  mud,  which,  at 
first  intercepted  in  its  descent,  gradually  sinks  into  the  mass 
of  matted  roots.    The  bed  floats,  but  is  kept  in  its  place  by 
a  willow  stake  driven  through  it  at  each  end,  which  admits 
of  its  rising  or  falling  in  accommodation  to  the  rise  or  fall  of 
the  water."    Things  seem  to  grow  wonderfully  upon  these 
floating  gardens.     I  bought  from  one  of  the  cultivators,  who 
was  at  work  upon  his  garden,  twelve  fine  cucumbers  for  3d. 
These  long  strips  of  gardens  have  waterways  between  them, 
wide  enough  to  allow  the  gardeners  to  pass  along  by  them 
on  both  sides  in  small  canoes.      I  got  out  on  to  one  of  the 
gardens  from  the  boat,  and  though  very  shaky,  I  did  not  fall 
through.  In  another  part  of  the  lake  I  observed  some  long  beds, 
perhaps  twelve  feet  wide,  formed  by  throwing  up  the  mud,  and 
thus  creating  terra  firma^  ranged  side  by  side,  but  with  a  water- 
way between  them,  also  bearing  very  fine  melons  and  cucumbers. 
Moving  on  in  our  tour  round  the  lake,  we  came  to  a  village 
called  Huzrutbal,  which  has  the  privilege  of  possessing  a 
mosque,  somewhat  highly  decorated  on  the  exterior,  contain- 
ing in  its  saikctwm  sanetorumy  in  a  small  silver  box  with  a  glass 
lid— what  think  you  ?    Why,  a  hair  of  the  Prophet^s  beard  I 
As  this  sacred  relic  is  only  produced  four  times  a  year  for  the 
edification  of  the  faithful,  and  only  on   certain  great  Ma- 
hometan festivals,  of  course  I  could  not  see  it  to-day,  and 
as  the  going  into  the  mosque  necessitated  pulling  off  a  pair  of 


424  THE  DUL  OR  CITY  LAKE. 

]aced  boots,  I  declined  the  invitation  to  go  in  at  alL    The  chief 
festival  upon  which  this  precious  relic  is  exposed  to  the  wonder- 
ing eyes  of  the  faithful  takes  place  in  August,  and  then  a 
scene  presents  itself  on  the  lake  worth  witnessing.  Thousands 
of  boats  are  there  filled  with  gaily-dressed  people  of  all  ranks 
and  classes,  men,  women,  and  children,  of  all  ages.    A  few 
hundred  yards  farther  on,  our  progress  round  the  lake  brought 
us  to  the  Nusseb  Bagh,  a  magnificent  grove  of  plane-trees, 
planted,  they  say,  in  the  time  of  Akbar.     It  covers  manj 
acres.     I  measured  one  tree  that  appeared  to  be  an  average  of 
the  whole  grove,  and  found  it  to  be  fifteen  feet  in  circumference 
five  feet  from  the  ground.      I  afterwards  measured  another 
in  the  Shalimar  Gardens  :  it  was  thirty  feet  in  circumference. 
A  little  farther  on,  I  landed  on  the  Isle  of  Chenois,  a  small 
artificial  island,  which  at  one  time  possessed  a  temple ;  and 
afterwards  Mr  Yigne  and  two  other  travellers  deposited  upon 
it  a  black  marble  tablet  with  the  names  inscribed  of  seyeral 
European  travellers  who  had  visited  the  Happy  Valley  some 
years  before  ;  but  neither  temple  nor  tablet  is  there  now. 
It  is  a  sorry  little  island,  the  debris  of  a  ruin  lying  about  it, 
and  that  is  all.    It  is  forty-six  yards  square,  and  three  or  four 
feet  above  the  surface  of  the  water.     Voila  tout  I     Oar  next 
stopping-place  was  at  the  Shalimar  Bagh,  a  fine  old  pleasure 
garden  made  by  the  Emperor  Gehan  Gir,  connected  with  the 
lake  by  a  canal  a  mile  long  and  twelve  yards  wide.    On  each 
side  of  this  canal  is  a  broad  green  turf  walk  overshadowed 
by  large  trees.     This  garden  is  about  600  yards  long,  and 
through  the  centre  of  it  in  its  whole  length  run  terraces,  fonr 
of  them,  one  above  another ;  and  down  these  terraces,  kept 
within  bounds,  about  fourteen  feet  wide,  comes  a  stream  of 
water  brought  from  the  mountain  just  in  the  rear,  inter- 
cepted at  each  of  the  four  terraces  by  a  marble  tank,  from 
the  bottom  of  which  protrude  a  large  number  of  inch  copper 
pipes,  in  all  perhaps  two  to  three  hundred,  each  of  which 
throws  a  jet  of  water  before  allowing  it  to  pass  on  to  the 
terrace   or   tank  just  below.     The  arrangement,   I  shonid 
think,  will  not  admit  of  a  jet  beipg  thrown  more  than  aeven 
or  eight  feet  high ;  still  these  numerous  jets,  accompanied  br 
the  little  cascade  formed  by  the  water  falling  from  one  terrace 
to  the  other  accompanying  them,,  must   have  a   pleasing 


A   WORKING  WOMAN.  425 

effect  The  upper  terrace  contains  a  pavilion  specially  dedi- 
cated to  the  ladies  of  the  zenana ;  terrace  and  pavilion  en- 
closed by  a  wall,  where  doubtless  the  Emperor's  favourites, 
centuries  ago,  enjoyed  themselves  to  the  fullest  extent  their 
position  permitted.  In  the  garden  are  some  fine  specimens 
of  the  plane,  mulberry,  and  other  trees.  From  this  garden  we 
passed  on  towards  another  of  the  same  character,  called  the 
Neshab  Bagh,  also  the  creation  of  one  of  the  Mogul  Empe- 
rors. The  water  is  drawn  from  the  same  source  that  sup- 
plies the  Shalimar  Bagh,  and  the  arrangement  for  jets  and 
cascades  more  or  less  the  same  also.  After  visiting  another 
toy  island,  now  a  heap  of  ruins,  we  shaped  our  course  in  the 
direction  of  the  gate,  having  been  on  the  lake  for  nine  hours  ; 
and  as  soon  as  we  got  through,  we  landed,  and  made  the  best 
of  our  way  across  the  fields  to  our  bungalow.  The  water  of 
this  lake  is  as  clear  as  crystal,  and  as  large  drops  of  it,  by 
the  movement  of  the  boat,  were  rolled  on  and  off  the  large 
lotus  leaves  spread  out  on  the  mirror  surface,  and  which 
cover  a  considerable  portion  of  the  lake,  they  looked  like 
real  crystals.  The  whole  bottom  of  the  lake  is  covered  with 
plants,  and  looking  overboard  was  like  peering  into  a  sub- 
marine garden. 

14M. — On  taking  my  usual  morning's  walk  before  break- 
fast, I  stumbled  upon  a  good-looking  Kashmirian  woman, 
with  her  fingers  and  arms  full  of  rings,  sitting  on  the  shady 
side  of  a  fine  row  of  poplars,  instead  of  being  at  work  in 
the  adjoining  field  of  barley  with  a  number  of  other  women, 
a  group  to  which  she  evidently  belonged ;  she  was  taking  a 
little  recreation.  To  one  child  she  was  giving  the  breast, 
her  bosom  entirely  exposed,  whilst  upon  another  child,  with 
its  head  in  her  lap,  she  was  busily  employed  in  picking  out 
lice :  she  looked  up  at  me  for  a  moment  as  I  passed,  but 
without  interrupting  her  work.  The  women  of  Sreenuggur — 
I  mean  the  ordinary  class  of  women  one  sees  on  the  roads 
or  in  the  boats,  in  fact  the  working  women — are  not  pretty. 
Doubtless  many  among  the  young  ones  would  be  very  pass- 
able after  a  good  tubbing ;  but  they  are  all  dirty  in  their 
dress,  and  I  suspect  in  their  person  also. 

The  trees,  again,  the  more  I  see  of  them,  the  more  am  I 
struck  by  their  wonderful  growth,  particularly  the  poplar, 


426  WONDERFUL  GROWTH  OF  TREES. 

the  plane,  the  willow,  the  walnnt,  and  the  mulberry.     I  haie 
never  seen  such  growth  and  such  beauty  too  anywhere  in 
this  class  of  trees.     But  everything  grows  well  here;  and  no 
wonder,  with  such  a  soil — alluvial,  and  heaven  only  knowi 
to  what  depth.     The  sequoia  or  Wellingtonia  here  would  grow 
into  the  dimensions  of  a  large  house,  instead  of  attaining  to 
the  dimensions  only  of  a  small  one^  as  it  does  in  its  natiTe 
forests.      I  have  a  good  mind  to  have  some  of  the  seed 
planted  here,  that  I  might  see  for  myself  how  big  it  will 
grow ;  like  the  old  woman  who,  having  heard  that  panoti 
sometimes  attained  the  age  of  a  hundred  years,  bought  i 
young  one  that  she  might  herself  be  able  to  see  if  there  wu 
any  truth  in  the  story  or  not.    This  valley  of  Kashmir,  we  mnst 
bear  in  mind,  has  had  an  opportunity  of  forming  a  soil  snch 
as  few  valleys  have  enjoyed.     A  lake  for  how  long  no  one 
knows,  apparently  some  800  feet  deep  to  start  with ;  when 
at  length,  tired  of  being  penned  up  within  confined  bonndB 
(though  they  can  hardly  be  called  narrow  bounds — a  hnndied 
miles  by  forty),  its  waters  broke  through  at  Baramula,  and 
as  the  outlet  enlarged  and  deepened,  and  the  waters  gradnally 
subsided,   the  rich  soil  that  for  millions  of  years,  perhaps 
(or  hundreds  of  millions  for  aught  I  know),  had  been  wash- 
ing down  into  it  from  the  surrounding  mountains  was  d^ 
posited,  and  it  was  in  this  way,  they  tell  us,  that  the  present 
valley  of  Kashmir  had  its  origin.     No  wonder,  then,  that 
trees  attain  such  dimensions  as  they  do  here;  that  a  handfiil 
of  mud  strewn  over  a  bed  of  aquatic  plants,  whose  connec- 
tion with  their  roots  has  been  severed,  should  create  a  soil 
capable   of  producing   an  unparalleled   growth  in  melons^ 
cucumbers,  and  suchlike  succulent  vegetables.      But  so  it 
is:  the  floating  gardens  of  the  Dul  Lake  put  to  shame  our 
English  hotbeds,  made  with  so  much  care  and  at  snch  s 
cost.     I  have  said  that  I  bought  yesterday  from  a  gardener 
on  the  Dul  Lake  a  dozen  cucumbers  for  3d.,  and  from  a 
boat  that  was  fishing  not  a  hundred  yards  from  this  garden 
I  bought  a  dozen  fish,  very  much  resembling  trout,  averag- 
ing ten  inches  in  length,  for  one  anna  (l^d.)     It  seems  to 
me  that  the   standard  of  food  in   Kashmir  must  be  rice; 
the  price  of  all   other  articles  of  food  is  regulated  bj  the 
price  of  rice.     If  a  man  has  sufficient  rice,  he  cares  for  no 


'  CHEAP  CUCUMBERS  AND  FISH— TOMBS,      427 

other  food ;  if  he  has  no  rice,  no  other  food  will  satisfy  hiuL 
For  2s.  a  man  may  now  buy  80  lbs.  of  paddy,  snfficient  to 
keep  him  for  a  month.  The  man  who  sold  me  a  dozen  trout 
yesterday,  all  of  which  would  not  have  made  one  satisfying 
meal  for  him,  received  in  exchange  money  sufficient  to  buy 
rice  to  keep  him  for  two  days ;  so  he  did  not  make  a  bad 
bargain  after  all. 

The  Badsh&h,  which  the  guide-book  says   is  the  noblest 

rain  in  the  city,  is  the  tomb  of  Zainul  Aboodin,  who  lived 

in    1422,  and  was  the  eighth  and  most  renowned  of  the 

Mahometan  rulers  of  Kashmir.      I  have  just   come  from 

visiting  the  outside  of  it ;  for  the  inside,  besides  the  body  of 

Zainul  Aboodin  (if  it  be  there  at  all),  holds  as  much  wheat 

as  his  Highness  the  Maharajah  has  been  able  to  stuff  into  it, 

and  the  tomb  is  consequently  closed  against  sightseers.     The 

Maharajah  owns  all  the  land  of  Kashmir,  and  lets  it  out  to 

Ilia  subjects  for  cultivation,  his  Highness  receiving  in  the 

shape  of  rent  three-fourths  of  the  gross  produce,  and  a 

priority  of  right  to  realise  his  share  in  the  market,  and  of 

filing  the  rates  or  prices  to  be  paid.    His  Highness,  having 

made  such  a  bad  bargain  with  his  subjects,  is  consequently 

obliged  to  look  out  for  cheap  storage  for  his  grain,  so  he 

^^*^^s   the  tombs  of  his  predecessors  to  account,  which  is 

aoxibtless  quite  right  and  fair.     If  a  man  has  been  fool 

^^^^gh  to  erect  a  large  building  to  hold  his  shrunken  body 

^^^  '   death,  and  which,  if  properly  treated,  might  be   so 

p^j^j^^^   in  bulk  as  to  be  easily  carried  in  one*s  waistcoat 

e:xtra    *  ^^^^  ^^  serves  him  right  if  his  successors  utilise  the 

S'uide-K^^'     ^^'»   ^^  noblest  ruin  of  Kashmir  (as  the 

eiiiee     -/^^^  calls  it)  is  not  such  a  useless  ruin  after  all, 

to   jj^    .^^orda    protection  against  thieves  and  bad  weather 

^^^o^rv^  ^Sbness  the  Maharajah's  grain;  for  although  the 

^'"oiij  ^     *>  perhaps  bad  originally,  has  suffered  a  good  deal 

^^^Sojj^  ^^^  axid  tear,  the  edifice  is  still  entire.     It  is  an 

"^^ecf  j^^  brick     building   on  a  stone   foundation,  with  a 

J  Piocfe  ^^%      I  IxAve  been,  too,  to-day  to  look  at  the  Eedgah, 

^^v  Hn^    p^rk-^lLke  land  (the  guide-book  calls  it),  smooth, 

tbo^^  ^  ^^^j-peti^Ki  with  fine  grass.     It  had  been  better  and 

^^'^  lik^^*=^^^,  perhaps,  to  an  English  village  green, 

^^i-  ^    ^  ^-t-ge  one,  one  mile  long  and  a  quarter  of  a 


428  ENVIRONS  OF  SRRENUGGUR. 

mile  in  breadth.  The  old  mosque,  the  Allee  Mosjid,  stands 
at  the  northern  end  of  the  green,  and  dates  back  to  1471. 
It  is  tumbling  to  pieces  now;  but  being  of  wood,  the  wonder 
is  it  has  stood  so  long.  Close  alongside  of  it  are  a  dozen 
or  more  fine  old  planes,  as  old  perhaps  as  the  building  itself, 
some  of  the  largest,  they  say,  in  Kashmir.  I  measured  one, 
and  found  it  to  be  over  thirty  feet  in  the  most  knobby  part; 
and  whilst  performing  the  operation,  my  eyes  were  attracted 
by  the  figures  of  several  caterpillars  and  wood-lice  upon  the 
bark  of  the  tree.  The  representation  of  these  little  animals 
was  perfect ;  in  fact,  there  could  be  no  doubt  but  they  in 
some  way  or  other  had  been  victimised:  they  had  been 
turned  into  wood,  like  the  New  Zealand  caterpillars,  by 
some  process  of  which  I  am  ignorant.  By  the  help  of  i 
penknife  I  managed  to  disengage  some  of  them  fircon  the 
chenar,  to  which  they  must  have  been  long  attached.  Since 
I  returned  to  my  bungalow,  I  have  been  ransaddng  my 
brains  to  find  out  how  these  caterpillars  could  have  been 
turned  into  wood,  and  I  think  I  have  discovered  the  ratianaU 
of  the  operation.  The  part  of  the  plane-tree  to  which  they 
were  attached  was  bare,  had  lost  its  outer  coating  of  bark. 
Now,  may  it  not  have  happened  that  these  caterpillars,  vhen 
alive,  had  found  a  hollow  space  underneath  this  coating  of 
bark  (since  fallen  off),  and  had  there  taken  up  their  quar- 
ters ;  and  being  a  sleepy  sort  of  insect,  had  remained  nntil 
they  became  imprisoned,  by  an  increase  in  their  size  perhaps, 
and  ultimately,  as  their  bodies  decayed,  a  woody  fibrous 
substance  would  take  the  form  and  appearance  of  the  animals 
destroyed  ? 

IQtA, — On  the  river  yesterday  and  to-day.  Visited  the 
Maharajah's  new  palace-bungalow,  now  being  built  on  the 
left  bank  of  the  river.  A  very  rough  affair.  The  ceiling  of 
the  upper  rooms  papier-mach6,  in  squares  of  three  feet  by 
two,  shawl-pattern. 

nth. — Up  the  river ;  landed  at  the  bend  of  the  river,  and 
walked  across  to  Fandruttun.  Here,  close  to  the  village,  is 
the  well-preserved  Hindoo  temple  of  which  I  have  already 
made  mention.  There  are,  besides,  between  the  village  and 
the  foot  of  the  high  hill  behind  it,  many  dressed  stones,  the 
remains  of  ancient  buildings.      There  are  two  dilapidated 


liUINS  A  T  PANDR  UTTUN—D  UL  LAKE,         429 

huge  stone  Btatnes,  very  roughly  execated,  and  a  Lingam 
foil  five  feet  in  diameter,  standing  up  out  of  the  ground 
about  six  feet  Judging  by  the  foundations  of  some 
buildings  still  existing,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  a  city 
of  some  consequence  once  occupied  the  site.  A  monster 
stone  statue  (entire,  I  am  told),  which  stood  here,  was  lost 
in  the  river  five  years  ago,  whilst  being  put  into  a  boat  for 
transportation  to  Sreenuggur  by  the  then  Governor  of  the 
city.  During  great  part  of  yesterday  a  thunderstorm 
raged  in  the  mountains,  and  ultimately,  in  the  afternoon,  it 
reached  the  city,  and  rain  fell  for  many  hours — a  very 
nniisual  occurrence,  they  tell  me,  in  the  month  of  July. 

\%th. — ^Took  a  turn  in  a  shikarah  (a  small  boat)  this 
morning  on  the  Dul  or  City  Lake,  to  look  at  a  ruin  and  a 
small  garden  which  I  had  not  time  to  become  acquainted 
with  on  my  first  visit.  The  ruin  stands  about  450  feet  above 
the  village  of  Theed.  It  consists  of  three  long  ranges  of 
stone  buildings  in  terraces,  and  is  said  to  have  been  designed 
for  a  college  by  the  spiritual  guide  of  the  Emperor  Qehan 
GKr :  if  so,  it  may  date  back  300  years.  The  garden,  called 
Chnshma  Shahi,  is  a  small  affair,  half  an  acre  altogether, 
principally  noted  for  a  spring  which  starts  from  the  rock  up 
against  which  the  highest  part  of  the  garden  stands.  The 
arrangement  for  fountains  and  tanks  is  on  the  same  plan, 
more  or  less,  with  that  of  the  famous  Shalimar  Bagh.  The 
place  is  empty,  and  has  been  so  for  many  a  year,  and  its 
waterworks  all  out  of  order.  Both  these  places  are  a  good 
mile  or  more  from  the  margin  of  the  lake,  and  a  dirty  walk 
I  had  in  order  to  reach  them ;  for  it  had  been  raining  all 
night,  and  though,  when  I  started  from  the  bungalow  at 
seven,  there  was  no  rain  falling,  it  commenced  very  soon 
afterwards,  and  has  continued  ever  since  2  p.m.  When 
I  first  arrived  at  Sreenuggur,  everybody  to  whom  I  spoke 
pooh-poohed  the  idea  of  rain  falling  here  in  July  and 
August,  however  much  the  storms  might  rage  in  the 
surrounding  mountains  ;  but  notwithstanding  this  pooh- 
poohing  it  has  now  been  raining  with  little  intermission  for 
three  days.  On  the  first  day  of  this  present  batch  of  rain, 
the  people  here  said,  ^'  Oh  !  this  is  quite  exceptional ''  How 
apt  we  are  to  make  use  of  this  expression  !     Why,  within 


430  IVEA  THER'  WISE, 

the  last  six  months,  daring  which  I  have  been  on  the  move, 
I  have  heard  the  same  remark  with  regard  to  the  weather 
made  at  Jerosalem,  Aleppo,  Bagdad,  Korrachee,  Lahore,  and 
Mnrree,  and  at  a  score  of  other  places  beside.     The  fact  is, 
however,  there  are  very  few  persons  who  carry  any  sort  of 
register  of  the  weather  in  their  memories,  although  it  is  one 
of  those  matters  that  everybody  thinks  or  pretends  to  know 
all  about    Weather-wise  I  of  coarse,  I  never  met  a  man  yet 
who  did  not  know  all  about  the  weather,  who  could  not 
tell  you  exactly  the  sort  of  weather  you  are  to  have  for  the 
next  six  months ;  although,  perhaps,  if  you  were  to  go  back 
and  question  him  as  to   the  past,  you   would  find  that  he 
remembered  nothing  at  all  about  it.    And  even  among  those 
men  who  have  kept  some  register  of  the  weather,  bow  few 
are  there  whose  experience  extends  far  enough  back  to  be 
reliable  data  on  which  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  the  future ! 
Why,  I  believe,  before  Mr  Glaisher,  nobody  ever  did  keep  a 
weather  register  that  could  be  relied  on.      If  the  world  be  a 
hundred  millions  of  years  old — and  who  can  say  it  is  not  ? — 
it  would  be  necessary  to  have  a  register  of  the  weather  for  at 
least  one  million  of  years  to  be  of  any  use  in  enabling  yon 
to  forecast  the  weather  for  more  than  a  week  at  the  most 
What  old  sailor  is  there  who  has  not  often  had  occasion  to 
remark  that  those  who  have  had  least  experience  in  seafaring 
matters  are  the  very  men  who  believe  they  know  most  about 
them  ?  that  a  fellow  whose  whole  experience  is  limited  to 
half-a-dozen  passages  between  Calais  and  Dover  is  much 
more  likely  to  be  dogmatical  on  a  seafaring  question  than 
the  man  who  has  spent  the  whole  of  a  long  life  afloat  ?  And 
a  man  who  may  have  been  on  some  occasion  once  taken  ont 
by  a  friend  for  a  two  days'  cruise  in  a  yacht,  once  or  twice 
round  the  Isle  of  Wight  perhaps,  why,  that  man  most  likely 
thinks  that  he  has  nothing  more  to  learn  with  regard  either 
to  the  sea  or  to  ships  ;  and  if  it  were  not  for  the  ridicole  of 
his  acquaintances,  you  would  most  likely  meet  him  the  very 
next  day  after  getting  on  shore  going  up  Begent  Street  with 
a  tarpaulin  hat  on  and  a  telescope  slung  across  his  shoulders. 
And  so  it  is  with  regard  to  the  weather ;  the  man  who  has 
given  least  thought  to  the  subject  will  probably  be  the  fore- 
most to  give  a  dogmatic  opinion  regarding  it 


AN  ATTACK  ON  FLEAS—NO  MU^ID.  431 

20^A. — Should  a  man  chronicle  his  own  ailments  or  his 
follies  in  a  journal  like  this  ?  Why  not  ?  Well,  the  day  be- 
fore yesterday  I  came  back  from  my  cruise  on  the  Dul  Lake 
pretty  well  soaked,  for  it  had  been  raining  more  or  less 
nearly  all  the  time  of  my  trip,  which  lasted  seven  hours.  I 
took  little  notice,  and  did  not  change  my  clothes.  I  don't 
think  I  have  anywhere  chronicled  the  fact  that  all  these 
travellers'  bungalows  (and,  for  that  matter,  every  house  in 
Sreennggur  I  believe  also)  are  full  of  fleas.  The  floors,  both 
up-stairs  and  down,  being  composed  of  earth,  are  well  suited 
to  the  breeding  and  the  protection  of  these  little  animals.  I 
had  had  my  bungalow  swept  out  and  re-swept  out,  but  appa- 
rently without  in  the  smallest  degree  diminishing  the  original 
number  of  fleas  I  found  there  on  my  arrival ;  that  is,  if  I 
might  judge  by  the  unmerciful  manner  in  which  they  con- 
tinued to  make  war  upon  me  every  night  as  I  lay  down  on  my 
taruckle-bed  in  hope  of  sleep.  Well,  I  thought,  as  I  could  not 
sweep  away  the  fleas,  I  would  try  and  drown  them ;  so,  on  the 
unlucky  day  I  came  back  from  the  Dal  *Lake,  I  put  my  plan 
into  operation.  I  got  a  fellow  to  bring  a  skin  of  water  from 
the  river,  and  with  this,  my  bedroom  being  small,  I  deluged 
the  floor,  poured  water  into  all  the  cracks,  and,  in  fact, 
flooded  the  place  so  completely  that  a  small  steamer  might 
have  manoeuvred  there  without  any  risk  of  getting  aground. 
This  operation  having  been  completed  to  my  satisfaction,  I 
laid  myself  down  to  sleep  that  night  in  the  deluged  room,  be- 
lieving that  I  should  pass  a  flealess  night.  Nothing  of  the 
sort :  the  fleas  were  as  lively  as  ever ;  and  when  I  turned  out 
in  the  morning,  in  addition  to  being  flea-bitten,  I  found  I 
was  rheumatic,  as  Jack  would  say,from  clue  to  earing.  ^^  Well," 
I  thought,  ^^  this  is  a  pretty  go :  I  have  tried  to  drown  the  fleas 
for  something.''  So  from  that  moment  I  made  up  my  mind  to 
bear  with  them,  and  simply  learn  to  sleep  through  their  at- 
tacks. But  the  rheumatism  ?  Well,  it  is  very  troublesome, 
but  I  hope  to  get  rid  of  it  It  is  the  first  attack  of  the  sort 
I  have  ever  had  in  my  life. 

TSd. — I  paid  a  visit  this  morning  to  the  No  Musjid,  or 
Puttor  Mnsjid,  built  by  Noor  Jehan  Begum,  the  beautiful 
Nourmahal,  or  Light  of  the  Harem,  of  ^^  Lalla  Bookh. "  It  is  of 
polished  limestone,  sixty  yards  long  inside  by  about  eighteen, 


432  MANUSBUL  LAKE. 

and  divided  into  three  aisles  by  two  rows  of  massive  sfame 
columns,   which   extend   from   end   to    end.      I  fonnd  the 
floor  covered  from  end  to  end  with  rice  and  paddy,  lying  in 
heaps,  belonging  to  the  Maharajah.    This  mosque  is  in  a  good 
state  of  usefulness,  and  still  the  Government  can  turn  it  into 
a  barn.     The  Maharajah  is  Hindoo,  and  so  of  course  is  the 
whole  paraphernalia  of  the  Grovemment ;  but  seeing  that,  ont 
of  the  whole  population  of  Sreenuggur  (estimated  at  150,000), 
the   Mahometans   count  for   130,000,   one  would  think  the 
Government  would  hardly  have  ventured  to  occupy  so  miiy 
mosques  as  they  do  for  storing  grain.    The  large  endoied 
space  in  front  of  the  mosque  was  covered  with  piles  of  paddy 
and   rice,  being  assorted  before  being  put  into  the  mos^ 
granary.     When  about  to  leave  the  mosque,  I  found  one  tf 
our  boatmen  was  missing,  and  on  looking  after  him,  he  was 
discovered  in  strong  altercation  with  the  men  employed  in 
assorting  the  rice  and  paddy.     On  inquiry,  I  learned  that  hii 
brother,  who  had  been  passing  by  this  mosque  in  the  ettlj 
morning,  had  been  clapper-clawed,  and  setto  work  very  mnch 
against  his  will.     This  pressed  man  would  be  made  to  give 
one  day's  work  to  the  Maharajah,  nolens  volenSy  and  find  him- 
self in  food. 

What  would  the  beautiful  Mahometan  Nourmahal  wj  if 
she  could  but  look  down  (or  up,  as  it  may  be)  and  see  her 
handsome  mosque  desecrated  by  being  turned  into  a  grain- 
barn  by  a  Hindoo  ? 

21tk. — Yesterday  morning  at  six  o'clock  left  Sreenuggur 
in  a  doongah^  manned  by  four  men,  a  woman,  and  two  chil- 
dren, for  the  Manusbul  Lake,  called  by  the  guide-book  the 
prettiest  of  all  Kashmirian  lakes.  From  end  to  end  it  is  not 
more  than  three  miles,  and  about  a  mile  in  breadth,  and  is 
probably  the  smallest  of  all  the  lakes.  A  good  half  of  the 
lake  is  covered  with  the  lotus  and  other  water-plants.  The 
former  are  in  full  bloom,  and  the  flowers  are  very  fine ;  the 
leaves  of  the  plants,  the  largest  I  have  seen,  are  two  feet 
across.  Two- thirds  of  the  lake  are  encircled  by  high  hilb; 
the  most  remarkable  is  Aha  Thung,  said  to  be  6290  feet  above 
th&  sea.  There  are  two  villages  on  its  shore:  the  largest  is 
Kunbul,  of  which  the  inhabitants  find  employment  in  hnm* 


MANUSBUL  LAKE—PALHALLAN.  433 

iDg  lime,  the  Btone  being  close  at  hand  at  the  back  of  the 
Tillage. 

Sreenuggor  is  principally  supplied  with  lime  by  Konbul* 
The  lake  boasts  of  two  ruins :  one  is  the  Budsha  Bagh,  of 
which  there  are  no  other  remains  than  three  terraces,  one 
above  another ;  it  is  called  the  ruin  of  a  palace  and  a  gar- 
den, built  by  Jehangir  for  his  wife  Nourmahal :  the  other  ruin 
is  a  small  Hindoo  temple  standing  in  the  .water,  and  about 
twelve  feet  high.  An  eccentric  fellow,  a  fakir  from  Bok- 
hara, possesses  a  small  orchard  bordering  the  lake,  and  has 
been  for  years  employed  in  digging  in  it  what  he  calls  his 
grave,  and  makes  this  an  excuse  for  laying  his  visitors  under 
contribution.  I  went  into  his  grave  :  it  consists  of  a  tunnel 
driven  in  the  hillside,  six  feet  high,  and  about  the  same 
breadth,  and  now  twenty-one  yards  long.  To  look  at  this 
fakir  you  would  hardly  think  he  would  require  a  grave  for 
iteny  a  year  yet.  Manusbul  is  reached  from  the  Jhelum  by 
a'  tanal  about  a  mile  long,  running  up  to  it  from  the  village 
of  Sambul.  There  are  many  trees  about  the  borders  of  the 
lake,  and  some  convenient  places  for  encamping,  with  mos- 
quitoes in  abundance.  A  considerable  stream  is  brought 
down  the  side  of  the  valley,  and  half  encircles  the  lake,  some 
fifty  feet  above  it,  for  irrigation  purposes,  from  the  river  Scind, 
and  it  is  also  made  use  of  for  floating  wood  from  the  Scind 
to  the  limekilns.  Well,  Manusbul  might  be  the  prettiest  lake 
in  Kashmir,  but  it  is  not  half  so  interesting  as  the  Dul  or 
City  Lake.  We  left  it  early  this  morning,  and  are  now  on 
onr  way  to  Palhallan,  whence  we  take  ponies  to-morrow  for 
Galmurg,  twelve  miles  distant 

29^ — We  arrived  yesterday  at  Palhallan  at  2  p.m.,  and 
pitched  our  tent  there  for  the  night.  After  leaving  the  Nooroo 
Canal,  which  runs  out  of  the  Jhelum,  we  entered  a  swamp 
covered  with  rushes  and  water-plants,  and  extending  appar- 
ently to  the  foot  of  the  hills  all  around.  The  passage  through 
this  swamp  is  made  very  slowly,  and,  unless  at  mid-day, 
mosquitoes  must  abound  there  in  millions.  On  turning  out 
yesterday  at  Palhallan  to  start  on  horseback  for  this  place 
(Galmurg),  I  found  myself  anything  but  well,  so  we  stopped 
at  Khipore,  six  miles  farther  on,  for  the  night.  This  morning 
I  was  better,  so  we  started,  and  arrived  at  Gulmurg  a  little 


434  GULMURG. 

after  ten  o'clock.  The  pony-road  is  good  all  the  way,  the 
last  mile  and  a  half,  &om  Bahamarisha  to  the  commencemeDt 
of  the  Murg,  very  steep,  and  through  a  pretty  dense  forest, 
chiefly  firs,  with  a  sprinkling  of  the  deodar.  Our  coolies  irith 
the  luggage  arrived  an  hour  after  us ;  and  I  am  now  sitting 
in  the  front  part  of  my  little  tent,  pitched  on  a  green  hill, 
perhaps  a  couple  of  hundred  feet  above  the  swamp ;  for  swamp 
it  is  now,  this  Murg,  upon  the  beauty  of  which  the  guide- 
book expatiates  so  highly. 

It  is  raining  fast ;  they  tell  me  it  rains  every  day  here. 
The  hills  are  covered  with  mist,  and  the  temperature  is  at 
60"" — ^much  too  low  for  comfort  in  a  small  tent  with  an  un- 
pleasantly damp  atmosphere  pressing  upon  you  in  much  too 
close  proximity  all  around.  The  visitors'  tents  are  stack 
about,  not  very  close  together,  on  the  spurs  of  the  hills,  veil 
above  the  swamp.  They  tell  me  the  tops  of  the  mountains 
have  a  sprinkling  of  snow,  but  not  to  be  seen  just  now ;  and 
the  slopes  are  partially  covered  with  what  the  guide-book 
calls  deodar,  but  which  may  be  fir.  The  view  and  the  place, 
as  I  see  and  feel  them  now,  are  both  cold  and  comfortless; 
and  if  it  rains  every  day — and  they  tell  me  it  does — ^I  should 
pronounce  Gulmurg  to  be  an  undesirable  place  to  come  ta 
There  is  an  ominous  silence  prevailing,  caused  by  bad  weather; 
no  one  venturing  out  of  doors,  not  a  sound  to  break  the  dead 
calm,  not  even  the  tinkling  of  a  sheep-bell,  for  these  sheep 
have  no  bells. 

Atigust  2d. — Gulmurg  by  my  aneroid  is  about  2500  feet 
above  Sreenuggur,  and  about  8200  feet  above  sea-level;  it  is 
a  place  of  note  in  the  calendar  of  the  visitor  from  India,  aod 
the  sanatorium  of  Kashmir,  particularly  in  the  months  of 
July  and  August,  when  the  capital  is  supposed  to  be  malarioos 
and  otherwise  unhealthy.  The  guide-book  thus  describes 
Gulmurg : — "  It  is  a  beautiful  mountain  common,  nearly  3000 
feet  above  the  level  of  Sreenuggur ;  it  is  about  three  miles 
long,  and  varies  in  width  from  a  few  hundred  yards  to  mwe 
than  a  mile ;  its  direction  is  N.  W.  and  S.E.,  and  it  is  bounded  * 
on  all  sides  by  hills,  from  which  numerous  spurs  in  tk 
shape  of  grassy  knolls  project  far  into  the  whole  surface  of 
the  Murg,  and  the  projecting  knolls  are  clothed  with  flowers 
of  every  hue ;  and  hence  its  name,  from  fful^  a  flower,  and  mrji 


GULMURG.  435 

a  monntain  meadow ;  the  surrounding  hills  ore  also  covered 
bj  beautiful  deodars.  It  is  intersected  by  a  stream,  which 
enters  its  southern  extremity,  and  which  receives  numerous 
tributaries  in  its  course  towards  the  north-west,  where  it 
leaves  the  Murg  through  a  deep  gorge.  The  climate  of  Gul- 
murg  is  cool,  bracing,  and  salubrious,  and  although  the  rain- 
fall is  very  considerable,  it  is  a  justly  favourite  sanitarium  for 
visitors  during  the  months  of  July  and  August.  There  are 
no  bungalows  yet,  and  visitors  usually  encamp  upon  the  top 
of  one  of  the  numerous  knolls,  where  wood  for  the  log-fire, 
which  will  be  found  so  enjoyable  at  night,  is  abundant.  Milk 
and  butter  may  be  procured  in  any  quantity  from  the  ffiijurtis 
or  cowherds  about  the  Murg,  but  most  other  supplies  must  be 
procured  from  the  villages  below." 

With  such  a  description  of  Gulmurg  staring  me  in  the  face, 
'  I  could  not  quit  Kashmir  without  paying  it  a  visit. 

Well,  80  far,  after  a  five  days'  experience,  my  first  day's 
impression  of  the  place  seems  to  be  confirmed.    It  has  rained 
every  day   since   my  arrival,  and  to  such   an  extent,  that 
walking  about,  unless  on  the  spurs  which  shoot  out  from  the 
foot  of  the  hills,  has  become  simply  impossible.     I  cannot 
say  that  I  have  had  more  than  one  good  look  at  the  sun  yet ; 
he  half  Bhows  himself  at  timee  almost  every  day,  for  there 
is  nothing  steady  in  the  weather ;   there  is  constant  change 
going  on.     One  moment,  I  might  say,  the  surrounding  moun- 
tains are  covered  with  mist,  and  the  next  quite  free  from  it; 
the  fog  may  now  be  rushing  into  the  basin— for  basin  it  is, 
thongh  of  very  irregular  shape-from  one  extremity  of  the 
Mmg,  and  in   a  few  minutes  afterwards  it  may  be   seen 
rnshiDg  out  at  the  same  opening.     The  mist  is  always  in 
motioD,  sometimes  covering  the  whole  range  of  mountains, 
and  very  soon  afterwards  hanging  about  them  only  half  way 
up    their   sides,  leaving  the  snow-capped  summits  clearly 
defined     Then,  again,  it  is  not  unusual  for  the  mist  to  make 
an  attack  on  the  Murg  from  every  point  of  the  compass  at 
the   same  time,  filling   the   basin   to  the   brim   in  a   few 
minutes,  and  as  quickly  disappearing ;  and  notwithstanding 
this  constant   play  of  phantasmagoria,  I  have  scarcely  felt 
a  breath  of  wind  here  yet.      The  average  height  of  the 
mountains  that  encircle  the  Murg  may  be  about  10,000  feet 


436  GULMVRG. 

Starting  from  the  roots  of  the  numerous  green  spurs  tbt 
extend  down  into  the  irregularly-shaped  plain,  a  dense  belt 
of  large  well«grown  firs,  of  two  varieties,  reach  half  way  up 
the  sides  of  the  mountains,  entirely  embracing  the  Hmg. 
The  visitors  here  are  catting  and  slashing  these  trees  all 
day  long:  if  a  man  wants  merely  a  bough  or  two,  he  cats 
down  a  huge  tree  to  supply  himself;  neither  the  Maharajah 
or  any  one  else  in  his  behalf  interferes.  Notwithstanding 
the  guide-book  to  the  contrary,  I  doubt  if  there  is  a  single 
deodar  here.  I  have  been  collecting  a  few  seeds  from  both 
kinds  of  fir,  some  of  which  may  germinate ;  it  is,  howeyer, 
too  early  or  too  late  for  procuring  them,  the  cones  of  last 
year  being  pretty  nearly  all  rotten,  whilst  the  cones  of  the 
present  year's  growth  have  hardly  yet  perfected  their  seeds. 
It  is  true  the  Murg  is  covered  with  a  carpet  of  flowers,  most 
of  them,  if  not  all,  own  brothers  and  sisters  to  the  wild 
flowers  of  England.  On  the  surrounding  grassy  spurs  tbeie 
may  be  some  sixty  tents  pitched,  and  just  below  me,  half  waj 
down  the  hill,  is  the  church,  a  long  wooden  shed ;  for  we  ban 
a  chaplain  here,  and  a  doctor,  and  a  conmiissioner,  all  three 
sent  by  the  Indian  Government  for  the  protection  of  visitors, 
to  look  after  their  bodies  and  souls.  A  couple  of  thoiuaDd 
feet  lower  down  towards  the  valley,  where  there  are  gardens 
and  orchards,  bears,  both  the  black  and  the  brown,  are  Tei; 
numerous,  and  furnish  good  sport  to  some  of  our  young  mili- 
tary men.  I  am  here  perched  on  the  top  of  one  of  many 
spurs  that  run  down  into  the  plain,  and  around  me,  on  other 
spurs,  are  many  other  unfortunates.  I  daresay  in  fise 
weather  the  place  must  make  a  beautiful  picture :  the  plain 
covered  with  flowers ;  the  spurs,  clothed  with  the  richest  of 
verdure,  running  down  into  it ;  the  slopes  of  the  surrounding 
hills  densely  clad  with  forest  trees;  and  above  all,  the  towe^ 
ing  Himalayas,  with  their  snow-clad  summits,  not  quite 
reaching  to  the  heavens,  but  still  high  enough  to  mike 
grand  and  noble  scenery; — all  these  elements  combined 
really  form  in  fine  weather  as  charming  a  picture  as  one 
might  desire  to  look  upon.  Now,  on  the  contrary,  this 
beautiful  Murg  is  cold,  wet,  and  depressing.  The  plain  is  i 
swamp,  into  which  no  one  ventures.  Even  the  spurs,  though 
beautifully  rounded  ofi^,  falling  away  from  the  oenire,  as  if 


GULMURG.  437 

formed  to  be  kept  dry,  have  become  sodden  by  continuous 
rain,  and  partially  swampy ;  a  dense  mist  covers  the  moun- 
tains, and  it  is  very  seldom  we  get  a  peep  at  their  outline. 
All  this  may  be  borne  patiently  for  a  week  perhaps,  but 
when  it  extends  into  many  weeks,  as  it  has  done  this  season, 
it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  parched  plains  of  India 
are  looked  back  upon  with  regret,  and  indeed  many,  if  not 
all  the  families,  are  preparing  to  leave,  and  wait  only  for  one 
day  of  fine  weather  to  dry  their  tents  before  starting.  I  too 
shall  be  away  to  Sreenuggur  the  moment  there  is  a  break  in 
the  weather ;  for  my  tent,  though  tight  as  a  bottle,  is  too  small 
to  be  comfortable  under  constant  rain.  It  is  twelve  feet  by 
eight,  with  the  eaves  resting  on  the  ground,  and  just  high 
enough  to  permit  me  to  stand  upright  in  the  centre.  Around 
it  is  a  gutter,  from  which  a  stream  sufficient  to  drive  a  small 
mill  has  been  running  unceasingly  for  the  last  four  days. 

4/A. — There  was  to  have  been  service  in  the  church  this 
morning  by  the  Rev.  Mr  G.,  but  in  such  weather  he  judged 
it  useless  to  give  the  usual  signal,  by  firing  off  his  fowling- 
piece,  for  calling  together  the  congregation. 

Overhanging  our  little  encampment  are  a  dozen  or  more 
very  fine  pine-trees,  the  resort  of  a  number  of  large  black 
birds,  either  rooks,  crows,  or  jackdaws.  One  of  these  birds 
takes  possession  of  a  particular  tree,  and  there  he  sits  nearly 
all  day  long,  giving  utterance  to  such  a  variety  of  sounds, 
that  I  sometimes  think  the  fellow  must  be  an  educated  bird, 
and  I  am  not  quite  sure  that  he  has  not  a  nest  in  the  tree. 
There  are  some  tiny  singing  birds,  too,  about  our  tents,  that 
enliven  us  with  their  song,  and  help  to  break  the  tedium 
caused  by  this  unparalleled  dull  and  depressing  weather. 

6^A. — ^A  gleam  of  sunshine  yesterday  evening,  just  before 
sunset,  gave  us  hope  of  a  change  in  the  weather,  and  this 
morning  also  it  was  promising ;  but  alas  I  the  cup  has  been 
dashed  from  our  lips,  and  the  rain  is  upon  us  again  as  firmly 
as  ever.    Thermometer  at  7  A.M.,  57*. 

9M. — Yesterday  and  the  day  before  we  were  favoured  with 
our  usual  quantity  of  rain,  and  somewhat  more  to  boot. 
About  noon  yesterday  two  gentlemen  made  their  appearance 
on  my  spur,  and,  within  a  few  yards  of  my  tent,  staked  out  a 
bit  of  ground,  six  feet  by  three,  and  then  went  away.    '  I 


438  GULMURG—A  FUNERAL. 

• 

think  they  were  the  commissioner,  as  he  is  called  here,  Colonel 
M.,  and  Mr  G.,  the  chaplain.  On  sallying  out  of  my 
tent,  I  learned  that  tlie  bit  of  gronnd  staked  ont  was  for 
a  grave,  a  child  of  Mr  C.  having  died  a  few  hours  be- 
fore. Soon  afterwards  the  chaplain  returned  to  my  spar  with 
two  men,  whom  he  set  to  work  to  dig  the  grave.  Tliis  timehe 
sent  in  his  card  to  me^  so  I  invited  him  to  take  a  glass  of 
brandy  and  water.  The  weather  was  wet  and  cold.  He  ex- 
plained that  they  had  chosen  my*  spur  for  this  grave,  as  it 
was  likely  that  next  season  the  temporary  church  would 
be  built  upon  it,  and  that  they  hoped  at  the  same  time 
to  enclose  a  portion  of  the  spur  for  a  cemetery.  Bj 
and  by  Major  C.  made  his  appearance,  accompanied 
by  Dr  E.  The  doctor  was  suffering  from  an  attack  of 
fever  and  ague,  so  he  also  accepted  my  offer  of  a  glass 
of  brandy-and-water  as  the  weather  was  cold  and  wet 
The  men  continued  to  work  at  the  grave;  and  my  spur,  with 
so  many  visitors,  became  animated.  The  affair  created  a 
little  excitement,  which  was  what  I  wanted.  Sunset  came, 
and  my  visitors  departed.  I  was  left  in  charge  of  the  work, 
with  the  understanding  that  the  men  were  to  continue  work- 
ing an  hour  longer,  for  it  was  intended  to  bury  the  child 
at  eight  o'clock  this  morning.  The  workmen,  however,  made 
but  little  progress,  for  the  ground  became  harder  as  they  pro- 
ceeded, and  the  only  useful  implement  they  had  to  work  with 
was  a  hoe,  and  my  pewter  wash-hand  basin,  with  which  to 
throw  the  earth  out  of  the  grave.  This  morning  the  two  men 
were  early  on  the  ground,  but  heavy  rain,  which  commenced  to 
fall  soon  after  they  arrived,  obliged  them  to  abandon  the  wak, 
and  to  take  shelter  for  a  couple  of  hours  in  one  of  my  tents. 
They  then  resumed  work,  and  by  eleven  o'clock  the  grave  wtf 
finished,  five  feet  deep.  Just  at  that  hour,  with  my  glass  I 
could  see  the  coflSn  being  brought  down  the  ridge  of  a  dis- 
tant spur,  accompanied  by  Major  B.  and  a  host  of  ser- 
vants. It  was  half  an  hour  before  the  procession  began  to 
ascend  my  spur ;  when  it  did,  the  chaplain.  Colonel  E, 
Colonel  D.,  Mr  S.,  and  some  other  gentlemen  who  had 
gathered  about  the  grave,  walked  down,  and  met  it  as  it 
came  up.  The  coffin  was  of  plain  deal,  and  if  it  had  aof 
inscription,  it  was  not  visible,  for  the  cover  of  the  coffin  was 


GULMURG.  439 

quite  overlaid  with  flowers.  After  the  coffin  was  lowered  into 
the  grave,  I  observed  Major  6.  hand  to  a  gentleman,  who 
had  got  into  the  grave  to  adjust  the  coffin,  a  little  bunch  of 
violets,  which  was  quietly  laid  upon  the  head  of  the  coffin  ;  it 
was  a  mother's  last  offering  to  an  only  child,  a  fine  little  boy 
only  eighteen  months  old.  The  service  ended,  the  grave  was 
rapidly  filled  with  earth.  It  is  now  covered  with  flowers, 
taken  up  with  a  good  amount  of  earth  attached  to  the  roots, 
and  it  may  possibly  form  the  nucleus  of  the  Gulmurg 
cemetery.  Mra  S.  and  some  gentlemen  pressed  me  to 
move  my  tent,  and  could  hardly  be  persuaded  that  I  could 
feel  comfortable  with  a  grave  so  close  to  me.  They  did  not 
know  my  peculiar  idiosyncrasy,  and  how  much  at  home  I 
could  feel  surrounded  by  graves.  No  doubt  many  people  there 
are  who  would  not  have  relished  having  a  grave  dug  close 
by  their  tent,  and  it  was  perhaps  inconsiderate,  and  not  over- 
courteous,  on  the  part  of  the  conmiissioner  or  the  chaplain,  and 
in  bad  taste  perhaps,  to  come  to  my  spur,  and  mark  out  the 
spot  for  a  grave  close  to  my  tent,  without  first  asking  if  I  had 
any  objection  to  its  being  made  there.  As  it  happened,  I 
rather  liked  the  whole  affair:  it  jumped  with  my  humour, 
but  they  did  not  know  that;  it  brought  me  into  contact 
with  people  whom  I  had  not  seen  before,  and  made  a  little 
excitement  on  my  spur.  I  was  to  have  started  for  Sreenuggur 
this  morning,  but  rain  came  on  and  prevented  me,  and  now 
it  is  still  raining,  and  it  is  doubtful  if  I  shall  leave  even 
to-morrow. 

10^. — It  has  been  raining  off  and  on  all  day  (last  night 
it  was  continuous),  and  we  have  seen  the  sun  only  for  half-an- 
honr.  It  came  out  just  in  time,  before  it  set,  to  gild  the  edge 
of  the  heavy  clouds  which  all  day  had  been  hanging  about 
the  mountains.  It  has  a  fashion  of  showing  itself  for  a  few 
minutes  just  before  retiring  to  rest,  and  in  doing  so,  it  has 
on  more  occasions  than  one  raised  hopes  of  a  fine  day  on  the 
morrow,  but  no  fine  day  has  come.  To-morrow  will  be  Sun- 
day, so  I  have  told  the  coolies  that,  however  the  weather  may 
be,  I  will  not  start  before  Monday.  This  day  has  been  the 
only  fine  day  I  have  experienced  in  Gulmurg,  and  when  I  got 
up  and  found  the  sun  shining  so  brightly,  I  began  to  think  I 
had  not  acted  very  wisely  in  remaining  to  go  to  church,  more 


440     GULMURG  TO  MAGAM  AND  SREENUGGUR, 

particularly  as  I  believed  there  must  be  letters  waiting  for 
me  at  Sreenuggur.  Breakfast-time  had  just  arrived,  when,  lo! 
and  behold,  who  should  present  himself  at  the  door  of  mj 
tent  but  the  postman  with  a  batch  of  letters ;  they  had  been 
sent  up  from  Sreenuggur  by  mistake.  This,  indeed,  was  virtue 
rewarded,  as  I  told  the  parson  on  coming  out  of  church.  On 
both  occasions,  morning  and  evening,  the  congregation  to-dny 
numbered  twenty-five  persons.  The  ladies  came  in^/ompoM. 
They  might  have  been  seen  coming  down  the  different  spun 
on  which  their  tents  were  pitched,  in  a  reclining  position,  in 
something  that  bore  a  strong  resemblance  to  a  small  Goaya- 
quil  hammock,  and  borne  along  by  coolies.  It  is  not  a 
graceful  position,  perhaps,  for  a  lady  to  be  placed  in,  but  it  is 
one  in  which  they  do  all  their  travelling  in  Kashmir,  and 
even  in  Murree,  I  have  always  seen  them  brought  to  the  pro- 
menade in  the  same  manner.  The  ladies  of  India  seem  Teir 
averse  to  taking  exercise. 

Magam, — ^A  place  unknown  to  the  guide-book  or  to  Mont- 
gomery's route-map.  Nevertheless,  it  is  an  exceedingly  pi^ 
turesque  spot,  doubtless  containing  a  good  many  cotta^ 
dotted  about  apart  from  each  other,  but  so  hidden  by  trees 
that  you  can  never  see  more  than  two  or  three  of  them  at  a 
time.  Plane,  walnut,  apple  and  pear  trees,  and  willows  too, 
mixed  up  with  the  greenest  of  pasture  and  paddy  and  cot- 
ton cultivation,  cover  many  thousands  of  acres.  From  where 
I  am  encamped  about  a  hundred  yards,  under  some  of  the 
noblest  walnut-trees  I  have  ever  seen,  and  now  full  of  fruit 
just  ripe,  I  get  half-a-dozen  beautiful  peeps  of  the  riyer 
Magam,  coursing  its  way  gently  between  banks  covered  with 
trees  towards  the  mighty  Jhelum.  I  am  writing  under  the 
shade  of  one  of  these  big  trees  in  a  delicious  temperature  and 
in  the  brightest  of  weather,  the  thermometer  hardly  reaching 
80°.  When  I  got  up  this  morning  at  Gulmurg  it  marked  54°. 
I  was  about  four  hours  coming  here,  the  distance,  they  say,  is 
eight  coss,  or  about  twelve  miles.  It  may  not  be  quite  so 
much. 

11^^ — Yesterday,  Sunday,  was  the  first  day  I  had  seen 
Gulmurg  free  from  rain.  When  I  left,  8.30  in  the  morn- 
ing, it  promised  that  this  also  would  be  a  fine  day,  and  per- 


G  ULMVRG  TO  MA  GAM  AND'SREENUGG  UR.     44 1 

haps  it  might  be,  though  I  heard  Bome  thundar.  among  the 
hiUs. 

\2th. — On  leaving  Gulmurg,  journeying  on  my  way  towards 
this  little  place,  the  road  was  abominable,  and  particularly 
slippery,  consequent  on  the  much  rain  thi^t  had  lately  fallen. 
As  you  emerge  from  Gulmurg  you  descend  rapidly,  and  con- 
tinue to  do  so  for  about  500  yards,  when  you  reach  a  sort  of 
common,  free,  or  nearly  so,  of  the  large  fir-trees  you  have  been 
hitherto  travelling  among,  but  covered  partially  with  shrubs. 
The  wild  rose-bush,  though  out  of  bloom  now,  and  the 
bramble,  with  its  berries  just  becoming  ripe,  were  there  in 
abundance.  We  travelled  several  miles  over  this  common, 
gradually  approaching  the  southern  side  of  it,  until  we  found 
ourselves  skirting  a  valley  covered  with  paddy,  at  first  a 
couple  of  hundred  feet  above  it,  but  gradually  the  road  took 
us  down  among  the  paddy-fields,  where  the  peasants  were 
busily  engaged  irrigating,  supplied  with  any  amount  of  water 
coursing  down  from  the  foot  of  the  hills  in  clear  and  spark- 
ing streams :  a  mile  or  two  more  of  a  jog-trot  march  in  this 
valley  brought  us  to  Magam.  On  the  way  we  passed  under 
some  ^of  the  finest  planes  I  had  yet  seen ;  and  here,  round- 
about where  I  am  writing,  they  abound ;  and  there  is  one  old 
tree  standing  triangular  fashion  on  three  legs,  forming  a  very 
good  circular  shelter  between  seven  and  eight  feet  in  diameter, 
and  about  the  same  height.  This  tree  must  be  very  old :  it 
has  been  chipped  and  chopped  about,  and  lopped  too,  most 
unmercifully,  and  still  it  is  well  covered  with  leaves,  and 
grows  vigorously,  and  has  thrown  out  all  around  its  roots  an 
entire  fringe  of  young  saplings.  It  is  still  a  noble  tree,  though 
shorn  of  its  best  branches,  and  runs  up  to  the  height  of  about 
sixty  feet.  But  it  was  on  the  way  down  we  met  with  some 
splendid  plane-trees,  and  unmutilated.  Beally,  allowing  for  a 
little  exaggeration,  one  might  almost  say  that  the  road  passed 
beneath  one  or  two  trees  that  took  us  half-an-hour  to  get 
clear  of  their. shadows;  that  is,  from  the  time  of  entering 
them  on  one  edge,  up  to  the  time  of  emerging  from  them  on 
the  other.  Truly  these  plane-trees  in  the  valley  of  Kashmir 
are  most  magnificent ;  I  never  tire  of  contemplating  them. 
I  saw  to-day,  what  J  had  noticed  before,  a  plantation  of  many 
acres  of  young  chenars  (plane),  and  thought  them  very  beauti- 


442  THE  KASHMIR/AN. 

ful :  their  vigorous  growth  and  bright  green  foliage  were  very 
striking.  I  detennined  at  once  to  take  home  some  of  tin 
seeds ;  but  it  is  in  vain  to  suppose  that  onr  soil  can  ever  pro- 
duce such  planes  as  the  alluvial  soil  of  the  valley  of  Kash- 
mir. You  lose  the  plane  when  you  get  up  to  7500  feet 
above  the  sea  or  thereabouts,  and  get  in  among  firs.  I  baie 
not  seen  a  single  deodar  to-day.  Some  travellers'  luggage 
has  just  arrived,  and  their  encampment  has  been  established 
close  to  my  little  tent — for  the  weather  is  so  fine  that  I  haie 
had  only  one  tent  pitched — so  that  I  shall  have  company  t(H 
night 

In  speaking  of  the  Kashmirian,  Moorcrofb  says,  ^^  He  ii 
ignorant,  selfish,  superstitious,  supple,  intriguing,  dishonest, 
and  false."  Heavens !  can  the  Eashmirian  deserve  this  cha- 
racter ?  How  is  it  that  we  travel  in  their  country  unarmed, 
and  live  in  houses  without  either  doors  or  windows,  open  to 
the  whole  world,  and  do  so  without  the  slightest  risk  of  life 
or  limb,  or  having  any  of  our  traps  stolen?  I  have  never 
heard  of  a  personal  outrage  being  suffered  in  Kashmir  by  the 
most  defenceless  traveller.  Is  the  Kashmirian  a  worse  cha- 
racter than  these  Easterns  generally  ?  Ignorant,  yea ;  that 
he  certainly  is,  to  an  extent  almost  incredible :  he  is  incapable 
of  performing  the  commonest  operation,  should  the  perfo^ 
mance  of  it  not  come  within  the  limited  sphere  of  his  every- 
day life.  Selfish :  this  quality  has  been  applied  to  the 
Eashmirian  thoughtlessly.  How  does  he  show  his  selfish- 
ness? His  average  earnings  do  not  exceed  two  mpeee  a 
month,  and  upon  that  he  lives,  becomes  strong,  stout,  and 
well-grown.  As  far  as  small  matters  are  concerned,  the  Kash- 
mirian is  as  ready  to  do  small  services  without  direct  remu- 
neration as  any  other  people  ;  and  as  to  selfishness  in  money 
dealings,  why  his  scope  for  disclosing  such  a  feeling  is  so 
limited,  that  it  must  want  occasions,  I  think,  to  show  itself. 
Superstitious :  what  Eastern  is  not  superstitious  ?  Indeed,  where 
ignorance  exists,  either  in  the  Eastern  or  the  Western  world, 
there  superstition  is  always  to  be  found.  Supple,  intriguiog) 
and  false  :  all  Easterns  are  supple,  and  perhaps  false — that  is, 
they  do  not  consider  it  discreditable  to  tell  a  falsehood — and  the 
Eashmirian  is  not  an  exception.  But  intriguing — what  does 
their  intriguing  consist  of?     They  have  in  their  hard  Utcs 


THE  KASHMIRIAN.  443 

no  scope  for  intrigue  that  I  can  discover.  They  are  slaves 
in  every  sense  of  the  word — at  any  rate,  in  the  worst  sense  of 
the  word.  Their  lives  and  their  property  are  at  the  disposal 
of  the  Maharajah ;  and  if  he  does  not  dispose  of  both  the  one 
and  the  other  in  a  barbarous  and  unjustifiable  manner,  it  is  be-* 
cause  he  is — that  is,  the  present  Maharajah — a  humane  man, 
and  also  because  he  is  kept  in  check  to  a  certain  extent  by 
our  Indian  authorities.  The  last  flaw  in  his  character  that 
Moorcroft  mentions  is  dishonesty ;  does  Moorcroft  mean  in 
his  dealings  ?  Well,  very  likely  the  poor  devil  does  occasion- 
ally, when  an  opportunity  o£fers,  endeavour  to  outwit  his 
neighbour  to  the  extent  of  an  anna  or  two ;  but  beyond  that, 
he  is  helpless  to  practice  dishonesty.  If  Moorcroft  means  to 
charge  him  with  thievish  propensities,  why,  I  think  he  is 
unjust  towards  the  Eashmirian.  As  I  have  mentioned  some- 
what to  the  same  e£fect  before,  Europeans  travel  about  in  this 
country,  living  in  tents  and  in  bungalows  without  doors  or 
windows,  with  everything  they  carry  with  them  exposed  to 
be  robbed,  yet  I  have  never  heard  of  their  having  sustained 
losses  of  any  kind.  Whateyer  it  may  be  that  prevents  him, 
certain  it  is  that  the  Kashmirian,  with  all  the  opportunities 
that  are  presented  to  him,  rarely  if  ever  robs  a  traveller. 
Morally  his  very  gross  ignorance  may  place  him  low  down 
in  the  scale ;  but  this  I  know — the  coolie,  the  lowest  class  of 
all  in  society,  is  trusted  constantly  to  carry  from  one  part  of 
Kashmir  to  another  articles  of  very  great  value,  as  well  as 
coin,  and  it  is  seldom  or  never  there  is  a  defaulter  among  them. 
Perhaps  if  he  were  more  educated  he  might  not  be  found  to  be 
so  trustworthy.  Great  crimes  are  rarely  committed  in  Kash- 
mir, and  capital  punishment  consequently  rarely  inflicted. 
In  other  days  Mussulmans  used  to  be  hanged  for  killing  a  cow, 
bnt  through  the  interference  of  the  British  Government  such 
a  crime  no  longer  brings  with  it  such  a  punishment.  So 
far  as  I  am  enabled  to  judge  of  these  people,  I  should  say 
the  Kashmirian  is  a  light-hearted,  thoughtless,  and  harmless 
being,  extremely  docile,  thankful  for  the  smallest  favour  you 
do  him.  My  luggage,  including  tents,  requires  eight  coolies 
to  carry  it,  for  which  the  regular  charge  is  four  annas, 
or  6d.,  a  stage,  whether  the  stage  be  eight  or  sixteen  miles. 
When  the  coolies  use  diligence  in  getting  over  the  ground,  I 


444  MAGAM—SREENUGGUR. 

usually  give  them  a  bakshish  of  one  anna  each  (1^.)'  ^^ 
which  they  are  invariably  most  grateful.  A  very  small 
sum  furnishes  the  Kashmirian  with  clothing;  his  food  is 
of  the  simplest  kind,  and  the  soil  of  this  valley,  his  lakes, 
and  his  rivers,  yield  it  to  him  abundantly  and  cheaply.  He 
does  not  require  to  work  hard  continuously  to  get  all  he 
wants.  During  the  visitors'  season,  no  doubt,  in  carrying 
luggage  he  does  some  hard  work  for  small  pay ;  for  example, 
when  he  carries  a  load  weighing  80  lbs.  sixteen  miles  for  6i 
But  the  rural  population  of  Kashmir^  which  supplies  these 
coolies  for  carrying  burdens,  is  essentially  agricultural,  and 
the  main  part  of  their  time  is  occupied  in  tilling  the  soil, 
and  they  seldom  work  hard  at  it  They  do  not,  in  ftct, 
require  to  do  so  to  supply  all  their  wants.  They  are  great 
talkers,  and  so  are  their  women.  I  should  say  that  a  good 
half  of  the  whole  of  their  lives  is  spent  in  practising  that  ac- 
complishment. 

14^A,  Sreetmggur. — We  were  about  four  hours  ooming 
here  yesterday  from  Magam.  The  road  is  level  all  the  way; 
the  distance  is  seven  koss,  or  about  ten  and  a  half  miles.  TtA 
first  five  miles  after  leaving  Magam  is  over  surprisingly  nch 
soil,  the  crops  of  maize,  cotton,  and  rice  (and  millet,  I  think) 
all  looking  strong  and  healthy.  I  think  I  must  have  passed 
over  yesterday  the  most  productive  part  of  the  valley  of 
Kashmir,  and  some  wonderful  chenars  and  walnut-trees  are 
met  with.  The  remaining  half  of  the  distance  is  a  swamp, 
upon  which  there  is  little  growing  but  rushes  :  a  raised  cause- 
way path  enables  the  traveller  to  pass  over  it  I  found  all 
the  travellers'  bungalows  here  occupied,  so  I  am  outside  in  my 
little  tent,  which  last  night  had  to  stand  the  brunt  of  a  heavy 
storm  of  thunder,  lightning,  rain,  and  wind,  of  short  duration, 
but  very  fierce  whilst  it  lasted.  I  am  happy  here  in  being  free 
from  fleas.  During  my  absence  at  Gulmurg,  the  Jhelum  has 
risen  very  much,  some  four  or  five  feet  at  least ;  for  the  river 
has  overflown  its  banks,  and  filled  the  lower  part  of  many 
bungalows.  They  tell  you  here  that  cholera  comes  only  with 
famine,  but  there  is  no  famine  at  present  here,  and  still  the 
deaths  from  cholera  number  sixty  daily:  filth  and  green  froit 
must  help  it  greatly  in  its  ravages.  This  morning,  in  my 
walk,  I  witnessed  some  barley-threshing.    The  barley  was  laid 


THRESHING  BARLEY^ COLONEL  GARDNER,  445 

CD  the  ground  in  beds  some  twenty  feet  square,  and  perhaps 
three  feet  thick,  and  then  five  bullocks,  tied  together  by 
a  straw  rope  round  their  necks,  were  turned  in  upon  it,  and 
driven  round  and  round  by  an  all  but  stark-naked  native. 
The  biggest  bullock  acted  as  a  pivot,  moving  round  upon  its 
own  centre,  upon  which  the  other  four  turned.  The  dirt 
which  was  being  mixed  up  with  the  barley  must  much 
improve  its  quality  I  A  nastier  or  rougher  mode  of  thresh- 
ing I  have  never  seen  practised.  The  barley  was  in  a  dozen 
good-sized  cocks,  belonging  to  as  many  different  owners, 
and  the  agent  of  the  Maharajah  was  quietly  seated  watch- 
ing the  operation  of  threshing  until  the  time  arrived 
for  carrying  off  his  master's  three-fourths  of  the  whole 
for  rent.  Whilst  penning  this  page,  I  have  been  bargain- 
ing with  a  Kashmirian  for  the  purchase  of  three  small 
papier-mach6  scent-bottles.  We  have  been  nearly  an  hour 
over  it.  The  Kashmirian,  to  begin  with,  demanded  eight 
rupees,  and  has  just  ended  by  accepting  four.  Great  patience 
is  necessary  in  order  to  obtain  from  these  gentry  at  a  fair 
price  anything  you  may  set  your  mind  on  among  their 
wares.  Made  the  acquaintance  yesterday  of  Colonel  Gardner, 
a  noted  character  hereabouts.  He  has  lived  a  long  and 
chequered  life,  being  now  in  his  eighty-sixth  year^  and  from 
his  appearance  he  may  last  a  while  longer  yet.  He  calls  him- 
self an  American ;  his  first  following  was  the  sea,  on  which, 
according  to  his  own  account,  he  acted  the  part  of  smuggler, 
and  something  more.  He  has  been  for  the  last  forty  years 
fighting  in  India,  generally  against  the  British,  always  in 
the  service  of  some  one  or  other  of  the  native  princes.  He 
was  with  Bunjeet  Sing  fighting  against  us  at  Lahore,  and 
there  I  believe  his  active  life  ended.  He  has  now  for  some 
years  been  a  resident  of  Sreenuggur.  He  has  four  wives,  the 
youngest  about  twenty-five,  by  whom  he  has  one  child,  a 
Utile  girl  at  school  in  Murree. 

ntL — At  7  A.M.  I  started  in  a  boat  for  Islamabad,  and 
after  nearly  five  hours'  tracking  against  the  stream,  we  have 
advanced  in  a  straight  line  only  about  five  miles — such  are 
the  turns  and  twists  in  the  Jhelum.  With  the  exception  of 
an  occasional  spur  that  finds  its  way  from  the  mountains 
down  to  the  river  bank,  both  sides  present  a  cultivated  un- 


446  SMELTING  IRON  ORE—CHAR. 

broken  alluvial  flat,  extending  many  miles.  The  river  is  bUI 
swollen,  but  not  as  it  has  been,  having  fallen  at  least  five 
feet  within  the  last  week ;  but  though  it  rises,  it  never  beooinei 
so  rapid  as  to  injure  its  banks,  but  flows  quietly  along  through 
the  whole  length  of  the  valley  from  Kundal  to  B&ramnla, 
some  xiinety  miles,  almost  from  where  it  takes  its  rise  to  the 
gorge  through  which  it  makes  its  exit  from  the  valley. 

\9>th. — Yesterday  we  reached  Pampoor.  I  looked  out  tt 
once  for  ponies,  for  the  purpose  of  visiting  the  iron-smelting 
works  at  Ch4r,  distant  from  Pampoor  about  ten  miles  inlind, 
and  forming  a  triangle  with  it  and  Suttapoor,  situated  on  the 
right  bank  of  the  Jhelum  (on  our  way  to  Islamitbad),  and 
where  we  rejoined  our  boat  after  visiting  Ch4r.  We  were 
kept  waiting  at  Pampoor  for  horses,  and  at  last  succeeded  in 
getting  only  one — and  such  a  beast  I  I  could  not  make  it 
move  at  all,  unless  when  treading  on  the  heels  of  the  coolie 
^ho  accompanied  us.  The  moment  the  coolie  ranged  ahead 
a  yard  or'  two,  the  pony  came  to  a  dead  halt,  and  all  the 
persuasion  in  the  world,  administered  by  stick  and  apor, 
were  insufficient  to  induce  him  to  move  a  peg;  and  it  was 
only  after  the  coolie  had  led  him  forward  by  the  bridle  for  a 
few  yards  that  he  could  be  made  to  follow  of  himseH  M; 
man  Antonio  was  on  foot ;  I  could  not  find  a  beast  for  him 
at  Pampoor.  The  road  to  Char  f];om  Pampoor  lies  all  the 
way  over  a  slovenly-cultivated  plain,  covered  with  crops  of 
cotton,  aniseed,  and  indian-corn — the  latter  as  fine  as  I  have 
ever  seen,  just  forming  head,  some  of  the  stalks  twelve  feet 
high.  We  steered  for  a  range  of  mountains  that  crossed  our 
track  at  right  angles,  at  the  foot  of  which  was  Ch4r,  which 
we  reached  after  a  tedious  ride  of  two  hours.  We  easily 
discovered  the  smelting-furnace,  for  it  was  in  full  blast  It 
consists  of  a  large  hut,  into  which  I  descended  some  five  or 
six  feet,  and  then  I  came  face  to  face,  on  about  a  level  with 
my  eyes,  with  a  fierce  little  charcoal  fire,  of  which,  however, 
I  could  not  see  much  from  where  I  stood.  Further  investi- 
gation developed  a  sort  of  funnel-chimney,  about  a  yard  high, 
and  two  feet  in  diameter,  on  a  platform  elevated  some  five 
feet  above  the  floor  of  the  hut ;  and  at  the  bottom,  by  raking 
away  the  ashes,  I  x^ould  see  into  a  hollow  place  beneath,  into 
which  the  melted  metal  fell.     On  mounting  to  the  top  ^ 


CHAR—SUTTAPOOR-'A  VANTIPORE.  447 

this  elevated  platform,  I  found  that  this  sort  of  chimney- 
funnel  was  kept  full  of  the  lightest  of  charcoal,  and  a  bright 
fire  was  kept  up  by  two  Eashmirians  working  two  sheepskin 
bellows,  80  as  to  make  the  stream  of  air  continuous.  Every 
now  and  then  a  pound  or  two  of  the  ground  ore  was  thrown 
in  upon  the  charcoal  in  the  chimney,  which,  of  course,  kept 
sinking  down  as  it  was  consumed,  carrying  with  it  the  melted 
ore,  which  fell  into  the  receptacle  beneath ;  and  from  what  I 
could  learn,  the  whole  result  of  a  day's  labour  by  this  rough 
process  was  a  lump  of  impure  iron,  weighing  perhaps  one 
cwt.,  which  in  that  state  was  sent  to  Sreenuggur,  and  there 
re-melted  and  turned  to  account.  This  lump  of  iron  was  taken 
cold  from  the  receptacle  after  the  slag  had  been  skimmed 
off  whilst  in  a  liquid  state.  There  must  have  been  twenty 
men  employed  at  this  smelting-hut  No  one  could  tell  me 
the  weight  of  the  ore  smelted  daily,  or  what  was  the  percen- 
tage of  metal  it  produced.  The  establishment  belonged  to 
Government  The  ore  (hematite)  was  mined  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  mountain  to  that  at  the  foot  of  which  it  was 
smelted,  and  had  to  be  brought  to  the  furnace  by  a  very 
rough  road  about  ten  miles  long.  Labour,  to  be  sure,  is 
very  cheap  in  Kashmir,  but  with  all  that,  this  iron  must  be 
a  dear  article  to  the  Maharajah.  At  Ch&r  I  got  rid  of  my 
miserable  pony,  and  succeeded  in  hiring  two  fresh  little 
beasts,  which  took  us  to  Suttapoor  in  a  little  more  than  an 
hour.  All  three  animals  cost  me  twelve  annas  (Is.  6d.)  The 
boat  did  not  arrive  at  Suttapoor  until  half  an  hour  after  us. 
It  took  her  more  than  four  hours  to  track  up,  though  the 
distance  by  land  is  only  five  miles.  So  soon  as  we  got  on 
board  we  pushed  on  again,  by  the  help  of  a  bright  moon,  for 
an  hour  and  a  half,  and  then  pulled  up  at  Karkarpoor,  a 
small  village,  for  the  night;  mosquitoes  in  abundance. 
Before  six  this  morning  we  were  again  under  way.  At  eight 
o^dock,  at  Avantipore,  we  came  opposite  to  the  remains  of 
what  must  have  been  once  a  most  imposing  edifice.  A  por- 
tion of  that  part  of  the  waU  which  included  the  entrance 
still  exists,  time-worn  certainly,  but  covered  with  elaborate 
carving.  The  foundation  of  the  building  has  been  traced  all 
round ;  it  measures  somewhat  more  than  seventy  yards  by 
fifty.      This  ruin  the  boatmen  call  Pundo:  it  is  100  yards 


448     PO  TTER  Y  AT  A  VANTIPORE— ISLAMABAD  *  ^ 

from  the  river-side ;  and  close  to  it  are  several  monndi^tf 
earth,  occupying  the  sites  upon  which  stood  other  extenm 
buildings.  We  have  mountains  on  both  sides  of  us :  ihoee 
on  the  left  are  distant  and  snow-capped,  whilst  those  on  the 
right  bank  are  a  good  deal  nearer,  and  their  spars  now  and 
again  come  within  a  mile  or  two  of  us.  When  on  shore  this 
morning,  visiting  the  ruins  of  Avantipore,  I  went  into  a  rode 
pottery,  and  the  boatman  bought  half-a-dozen  earthen  vei- 
sels — the  largest  might  hold  two  gallons — ^for  all  of  which  he 
paid  one  penny  halfpenny.  They  were  well  made,  and  evi- 
dently of  good  material.  On  approaching  a  small  village, 
which  we  have  just  passed,  we  heard  a  loud  and  confoaed 
wailing  by  women  and  children  going  on  upon  its  banks. 
A  child,  unnoticed  I  suppose,  had  just  tumbled  into  the 
river  and  been  drowned :  the  mother  was  then  prominent  in 
the  throng,  throwing  her  arms  about  very  fiercely,  whilst 
several  men  were  employed,  armed  with  a  sort  of  grains, 
endeavouring  to  fish  up  the  body. 

A  coolie  or  day  labourer  in  Sreenuggur  is  paid  two  annas, 
(3d.)  a  day,  labourers  employed  by  the  month  working  on 
buildings  get  one  and  a  half  annas  (2^d.)  and  two  lbs.  rice. 
The  price  of  paddy  now  is  one  rupee  for  150  lbs.,  which 
they  tell  me  will  produce  75  lbs.  rice.  Until  to-day,  my 
crew  has  consisted  of  a  man  and  his  wife,  an  old  man  who 
steers,  and  two  children  too  young  to  work.  The  skipper 
and  his  wife  are  about  the  hardest-working  people  I  have 
seen  in  Kashmir.  Yesterday  we  were  tracking  all  day  long ; 
indeed,  the  journey  is  made  principally  by  tracking,  varied 
by  an  occasional  poling.  The  woman,  well  forward  in  the 
family  way,  was  pretty  nearly  all  day  harnessed  to  the 
towing-rope,  working  cheerfully.  To-day  we  have  hired  an 
outsider  to  help  the  last  part  of  the  road. 

19M,  Islamabad, — To  save  trouble,  I  have  arranged  to 
make  the  boat  my  headquarters  whilst  I  remain  in  this 
neighbourhood.  This  accommodation  I  have  secured  by  the 
daily  payment  of  eight  annas  (Is.),  for  which  I  have  a 
lodging  and  the  services  of  the  skipper  and  his  wife,  two 
young  children,  and  the  skipper's  father.  I  should  have  said 
that  we  arrived  at  Kunbul  at  about  seven  o'clock  last  even- 
ing.    Three  other  boats  we  had  been  in  company  with  at 


ik- 


>    t 


1  ■•      ■  •• 


;  KUNBUL-'MARTUND.  449 

lAttapoor  did  not  arrive  ia  port  until  mid-day  to-day.  The 
▼iUage  of  Kanbnl  is  a  poor  little  place,  situated  at  the  bead 
of  the  navigable  waters  of  the  Jhelum,  and  one  mile  or 
thereabouts  from  Islamabad.  Bigbeharah,  which  we  passed  a 
few  miles  lower  down,  is  now  a  dilapidated  old  town.  I 
visited  a  Hindoo  temple  there  close  down  on  the  river  bank. 
A  large  lingam  was  there ;  in  fact,  there  were  two  large 
lingams  in  position,  and  half-a-dozen  smaller  ones  lying 
about  in  front  of  the  temple,  as  if  they  were  of  no  account. 
There  was  also  a  good-sized  bronze  god,  comfortably  seated 
with  a  smaller  one  crouching  between  his  legs.  There  was 
a  bronze  bull  very  well  set  up,  and  apparently  well-cared  for. 
The  bull  was  placed  only  a  few  yards  from  the  god — handy 
for  the  god  when  he  felt  inclined  for  a  ride  ;  and  the  temple 
was  in  a  good  state  of  repair. 

19^A. — This  morning  early  I  was  in  the  saddle,  accom- 
panied by  my  servant  and  the  boatman,  the  latter  a  good 
g^ide.  in  these  parts.  I  was  on  my  way  to  Martund  or 
Mattun,  a  ruin  which  has  the  reputation  of  being  the  most 
noteworthy  in  Kashmir.  Mr  Vigne  says  of  it: — "As  on 
isolated  ruin,  this  deserves,  on  account  of  its  solitary  and 
massive  grandeur,  to  be  ranked,  not  only  as  the  first  ruin  of 
the  kind  in  Kashmir,  but  as  one  of  the  noblest  amongst  the 
architectural  relics  of  antiquity  that  are  to  be  seen  in  any 
country.''  '  Well,  it  is  certainly  in  a  better  state  of  preserva- 
tion than  the  temple  at  Avantipore,  but  not  at  all  more 
isolated,  nor  was  it  perhaps  more  magnificent  when  they 
were  both  entire.  The  Governor  of  Sreenuggur,  taking 
advantage  of  the  more  easy  access  to  the  Avantipore  temple, 
has  despoiled  it  in  order  to  obtain  stone  cut  to  his  hand  for 
building  a  ghat  in  front  of  the  Maharajah's  new  bungalow. 
The  measure  of  ground  occupied  by  the  two  temples  is  about 
the  same,  and  the  construction  and  ornamentation  are  in  all 
respects  alike  ;  in  fact,  all  the  ruins  of  Hindoo  temples  I  have 
seen  in  Kashmir  indicate  precisely  the  same  plan.  A  noble 
entrance  to  an  oblong  enclosure,  with  a  row  of  cells  or 
niches  around  three  sides  of  it ;  in  the  centre,  or  a  little 
further  back  than  the  centre,  the  holy  of  holies  is  invariably 
placed  on  an  elevated  platform.  The  carving  on  the  walls 
at  Martund,  though  much  defaced,  has  been  very  elaborate, 

2  F 


( 


4SO  MARTUND—BARWUN. 

and  the  trefoil  arch  is  everywhere  apparent  thronghout  the 
ruin.  It  is  sitnated  on  the  Enraywah  of  Islamahady  about 
five  miles  from  the  town,  and  at  the  foot  of  a  range  of 
mountains.  It  is  called  by  the  natives  Panda  Larre  or 
Panda  Edna.  From  Martnnd  we  directed  our  steps  to  the 
village  of  Barwan,  abont  a  mile  distant,  and  there  I  visited 
the  most  holy  spring  of  Kashmir.  It  issues  from  a  hori- 
zontal fissure  at  the  foot  of  the  hills  behind  the  village,  and 
the  water  is  received  into  a  large  square  stone  tank,  in  which 
there  are  thousands  of  holy  fish ;  thence  it  runs  into  another 
tank ;  and  so  coursing  on,  it  finds  its  way  into  a  grove  of 
noble  plane-trees.  At  one  time  there  was  a  small  pleasure 
garden  around  this  spring,  but,  like  all  the  works  of  bygone 
days  in  this  country,  it  has  been  allowed  to  go  to  utter  raiu. 
Swarms  of  idle  fellows,  old  and  young,  are  in  attendance 
at  the  spring,  furnished  with  a  supply  of  food  for  sale  to 
visitors,  who  amuse  themselves  feeding  the  fish.  The  Hindoos 
who  come  to  worship  are,  of  course,  very  liberal  towards  the 
fish,  or  at  least  they  should  be  so,  seeing  that  their  own 
treatment  in  the  world  to  come  may  in  some  wise  depend 
upon  how  they  treat  the  holy  fish  in  this.  Patting  flowers 
upon  a  lingam,  bedaubing  their  foreheads  with  yellow  paint, 
and  feeding  fat  and  useless  fish,  are  all  praiseworthy  acts  in 
the  eyes  of  a  Hindoo. 

From  Barwun  we  retraced  our  steps  to  Islamabad,  and 
there  we  visited  the  Sirkari  Bagh,  a  small  pleasure  garden 
used  by  the  Maharajah  and  his  family  in  their  visits  to  the 
town.  And  such  a  pleasure  garden! — every  inch  of  it 
covered  with  weeds  a  foot  high !  The  key  of  the  garden-lock 
could  not  be  found  when  I  claimed  admittance,  so  the  man 
in  charge,  thinking  he  stood  a  fair  chance  of  getting  some- 
thing ^out  of  me  if  I  got  into  the  garden,  made  no  bones  of 
breaking  the  lock.  The  ground  was  strewed  with  fallen 
apples,  though  not  easily  found  among  the  weeds ;  neverthe- 
less, my  boatman  brought  away  as  many  as  he  could  well 
carry.  The  whole  place,  the  grounds,  the  garden,  and  the 
Maharajah's  apartments  adjoining,  were  in  a  state  of 
thorough  dilapidation,  the  normal  state  of  almost  eveiy 
public  edifice  in  Kashmir.  We  returned  to  the  boat  at 
Kunbul  some  three  or  four  hours  ago,  and  for  the  whole  of 


KASHMIRIAN  WOMEN— AITCHIBVL.  451 

that  time  some  half-dozen  women  on  the  bank  of  the  river 
hare  kept  np  a  continaons  quarrel,  which  is  still  going  on  ; 
and  if  it  ever  comes  to  an  end,  it  will  only  be  by  some  of  the 
combatants  coming  to  the  end  of  their  breath.  Verily  these 
Eashmirian  women  have  a  freer  use  of  their  tongues  than 
any  women  I  have  met  with  elsewhere.  They  have  been 
extolled  for  their  beauty.  Well,  many  of  the  younger  ones 
are  not  bad-looking ;  their  eyes  are  magnificent,  and  their 
teeth  generally  regular  and  white ;  their  other  features  are 
ordinarily  passable,  complexion  olive.  Their  dress  consists 
of  a  long  loose  garment,  which  reaches  from  the  neck  to  the 
heels,  usually  of  a  dirty  white  colour ;  a  skull-cap  with  a 
band  of  red  cloth  across  the  front,  and  an  ample  white  cloth 
thrown  over  the  head  and  shoulders.  The  Hindoo  women 
wear  also  a  piece  of  white  cotton  cloth  fastened  round  the 
waist.  They  wear  a  profusion  of  earrings,  nose-rings,  arm- 
lets, anklets,  and  finger-rings. 

Some  four  or  five  miles  before  we  reached  Kunbul  last 
evening,  we  found  the  river  staked  right  across,  and  partially 
netted  for  fishing.  The  fisherman — from  whom  I  bought  a 
dozen  good-sized  fish,  about  a  foot  long,  for  one  anna,  some- 
what resembling  trout,  called  in  Kashmir  gcmd — told  me  he 
paid  for  the  exclusive  privilege  of  fishing  the  upper  part  of 
the  river  200  rupees  a  year.  The  Kuraywah  of  Islamabad  is 
about  300  feet  high,  the  whole  a  mass  of  alluvial  soil,  but 
the  crops  upon  it  depend  on  rain  only.  At  a  small  expense 
the  whole  plain,  consisting  of  many  thousands  of  acres, 
might  be  irrigated  by  water  brought  from  the  mountains 
behind  it.  The  remains  of  an  ancient  canal  exist  on  this 
Kuraywah.  The  story  the  Hindoos  tell  is  this — that  the 
Mussulmans  killed  a  pig  there,  and  from  that  moment  and 
ever  after  the  water  ceased  to  run. 

20^ — This  morning  I  rode  to  Aitchibul,  good  seven  and  a 
half  miles  from  Kunbul :  the  road  leads  through  Islamabad. 
The  most  copious  springs  in  Kashmir  are  at  Aitchibul.  They 
issue  from  the  foot  of  a  range  of  hills  beyond  the  village, 
in  half-a-dozen  places,  all  close  together,  and  flow  through 
tanks,  and  supply  fountains  in  their  course,  until  united  they 
find  their  way  down  the  valley  in  one  very  respectable  stream. 
The  natives  say  they  believe  this  fine  spring  to  be  the  re- 


[ 


452        BHOOMJOO'-CHOLERA—THE  KOTWAL, 

appearance  of  the  river  Bringb,  which  disappears  through  a 
fissure  in  its  bed  some  miles  to  the  eastward  of  AitchibuL 
The  spurs  coming  down  from  the  range  of  hills,  from  the  foot 
of  which  the  several  springs  issue,  is  clothed  with  firs  and 
voung  deodars.  The  caves  of  Bhoomjoo,  which  I  omitted  to 
mention  yesterday,  are  hardly  worth  a  visit  The  entrance  to 
the  first  I  went  into  is  reached  by  climbing  up  some  fifty  or 
sixty  very  rough  steps  cut  or  worn  in  the  side  of  the  moun- 
tain. It  is  a  pretty  nearly  straight  tunnel,  from  three  to  five 
feet  wide,  and  from  five  to  seven  feet  high,  and  extending 
into  the  mountain  some  seventy  to  eighty  yards.  Some  fifty 
yards  from  the  entrance,  there  is,  on  the  left  hand,  a  small 
chamber,  in  which  are  deposited  some  human  bones.  Besides 
these  bones,  and  myriads  of  bats,  which  are  a  great  nuisance 
to  visitors,  this  cave  absolutely  contains  nothing.  Some  mad 
fakir,  like  him  at  the  Manusbul  Lake,  probably  made  the 
cave,  and  the  bones  we  see  there  may  be  his,  for  aught  I 
know.  The  entrance  to  the  other  cave  is  100  feet  above  the 
ground,  but  the  approach  to  it  is  by  a  fiight  of  stone  steps 
more  easily  traversed  than  the  steps  leading  to  the  first  cave. 
It  is  a  chamber  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock,  some  fifty  feet  by 
thirty,  and  about  twelve  feet  high.  Upon  a  raised  platform 
in  this  chamber  is  a  small  Hindoo  temple,  of  a  pyramidal 
form,  built  of  stone :  it  contains  a  lingam  and  nothing  more. 
The  zearut  of  Baba  Bamdeen  Bashi  is  not  far  from  this  cave, 
and  alongside  of  it  is  the  tomb  of  his  disciple,  BookoQdeen 
Rishi,  whoever  he  may  have  been. 

2\st. — Just  been  paying  a  visit  to  Islamabad;  the  cholera 
has  been  somewhat  rife  there — ^yesterday  five  deaths,  and 
to-day  only  three.  An  order  from  the  Kotwal  has  gone 
forth  that  the  whole  population,  Mahometans  and  Hindoos, 
men,  women,  and  children,  shall  for  three  days  employ  all 
their  time  in  prayer.  They  commenced  operations  yesterday, 
and  already  there  is  a  notable  decline  in  the  number  of 
deaths,  due,  no  doubt,  to  the  prayers  of  these  worthies! — 
though,  for  the  sake  of  truth,  I  must  state  that  the  night 
before  last  we  experienced  a  heavy  storm  of  thunder,  light- 
ning, and  rain,  which  sensibly  cooled  the  atmosphere;  and 
some,  who  are  sceptical  as  to  the  effect  of  the  prayers,  attri- 
bute the  decline  in  the  mortality  to  the  stornL     Be  this  as 


KASHMIR/AN  ARMY— BOA  TS  ON  THE  JHEL  UM.   453 

it  may,  I  found  the  place  in  mourDing  to-day,  prayers  loud 
and  deep  going  on  in  every  house.  The  manufacture  of  shawls 
is  carried  on  here  to  a  considerable  extent,  but  none  are  sold 
hare ;  they  have  all  to  go  to  Sreenuggur,  and  to  pay  the  duty 
before  they  are  exposed  or  offered  for  sale.  The  guide-book 
tells  me  that  the  army  of  Kashmir  and  Jummoo  probably 
numbers  more  than  twenty  battalions  of  infantry,  and  a  small 
force  of  cavalry  and  artillery,  and  is  pretty  eflScient.  All  I 
know  is,  that  at  the  English  post-office,  Sreenuggur,  are  six 
soldiers,  who  mount  guard  there.  The  postmaster  tells  me 
they  have  only  one  musket  among  them  all,  and  thxit  I  have 
myself  seen  to  be  a  flint-lock.  The  traveller's  boat  in  Kash- 
mir is  called  a  doongah;  it  is  usually  fifly-six  feet  long, 
aboat  six  feet  wide  amidships,  and  nearly  two  feet  deep, 
flat-bottomed,  and  very  pointed  at  both  ends ;  it  is  covered  for 
more  than  half  its  length  with  a  mat  awning,  supported  on 
a  light  wooden  roof.  The  crew  usually  consist  of  four  per- 
sons, men  and  women,  and  generally  some  two  or  three 
yonng  children,  who  all  live  in  the  after  part  of  the  boat. 
Down-stream  the  boat  is  propelled  by  paddles,  and  against 
the  stream  she  is  either  tracked  or  poled  along  as  it  may  be. 
Visitors  frequently  hire  these  boats  by  the  month,  and  pay 
for  them,  boat  and  crew,  fifteen  rupees  (thirty  shillings)  the 
month.  There  is  accommodation  on  the  deck  of  the  doongah 
for  a  bedstead,  a  table,  and  a  chair.  Any  sort  of  cooking 
may  te  done  on  board.  The  shikarah  resembles  in  all  re- 
spects the  doongahy  except  that  it  is  much  smaller ;  it  is  used 
for  moving  about  on  the  Jhelum  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Sreenuggur,  and  each  man  of  the  crew  is  paid  two  and  a  half 
rupees  a  month.  The  mtrh  and  the  bahutz  are  large  boats 
employed  in  transporting  grain  and  other  produce,  but  grain 
principally,  from  one  part  of  the  valley  to  another. 

22^. — I  went  to  Islamabad  this  morning  to  try  and  get 
change  of  a  small  cheque,  and  was  dn  my  way  to  the  house 
of  the  Kotwal,  when  a  man  whom  I  met  told  me  that  the 
Kotwal's  wife  had  died  of  cholera  last  night.  Of  course  I 
turned  my  steps  in  another  direction,  supposing  the  poor  man 
to  be  overwhelmed  with  grief  by  so  sudden  an  affliction  ; 
when,  lo  1  and  behold,  a  few  minutes  afterwards  he  came  run- 
ning towards  me  bringing  a  present  of  fruit!  "  Yes,''  h«  said. 


454  KUNB  UL—MA  WNPORE—SHOpI  YUN. 

in  reply  to  my  condolence,  ^'  God  had  thought  it  right  to  take 
his  wife  from  him,  and  there  was  no  help  for  if     He  bore 
the  loss  most  stoically.     Who  wonld  not  like  to  be  a  Mossnl- 
man  ?    It  was  only  last  night  that  the  Kotwal  gave  me  an 
accotint  of  the  state  of  the  cholera,  and  told  me  that  he  had 
ordered  prayers  to  be  offered  up  by  both  Mussulmans  and 
Hindoos  for  its  mitigation.     Does  it  not  seem  as  if  the  old 
gentleman  with  the  scythe,  in  revenge  for  the  Kotwal's  in- 
terference to  stay  the  cholera,  had  made  this  sudden  inroad 
on  his  house  ?    I  could  not  get  my  cheque  cashed,  so  I  re- 
turned in  all  haste  to  my  boat  at  Eunbul,  packed  up  my 
traps,  and  started  at  ten  o'clock  for  Shupiyun.     It  had  rained 
all  night  and  up  to  a  late  hour  in  the  morning,  or  I  should 
have  been  off  at  daybreak.     Starting  so  late,  the  coolies  with 
the  luggage  have  only  been  able  to  reach  this  village,  Mawn- 
pore,  a  little  more  than  half  way  between  Eunbul  and  Shu- 
piyun, or  about  thirteen  miles  from  Islamabad ;  so  here  I  am 
under  my  tent  again  until  to-morrow  morning.     The  plain 
between  this  and  Eunbul  is  every  inch  of  it  under  paddy, 
and  I  may  say  under  water  also,  for  we   have  made  the 
journey  literally  through  flooded  fields  of  paddy.     In  this 
village,  they  tell  me,  there  is  no  grain  but  rice  consumed, 
and  certainly  I  saw  nothing  but  rice  growing  on  the  whole 
plain. 

23^ — We  got  away  from  Mawnpore  soon  after  six  o'clock 
this  morning,  and  a  ride  of  three  hours  brought  us  to  Shu- 
piyun ;  the  distance  is  twelve  miles,  about  half  of  it  through 
paddy-fields,  and  the  other  half  along  the  slopes  of  low  hills. 
After  a  detention  of  more  than  three  hours  at  Shupiyun,  we 
at  last  got  coolies  and  a  couple  of  ponies,  and  left  for  this, 
Hirpore,  seven  and  a  half  miles,  where  we  arrived  in  two 
hours  and  a  quarter.  In  this  last  journey  we  have  kept  the 
Bembiara  in  sight  almost  all  the  time,  following  along  the 
right  bank.  This  river  in  this  part  is  not  much  more  than  a 
mountain  torrent  The  hillside  on  our  left  is  thickly  covered 
with  fir-trees,  and  the  road  lined  with  apple  and  pear  trees. 
There  is  also  a  sprinkling  of  many  other  sorts  of  trees,  and  a 
great  profusion  of  flowers.  Hirpore  is  a  small  village.  Our 
lodging  is  in  an  upstair  room  of  an  old  Mogul  serai,  the  only 
part  of  it  which  is  not  a  ruin.    My  aneroid  says  we  are  7500 


HIRPORE-^ALIABAD  SERAI— POSHIANA,      455 

feet  above  the  sea,  which  accotints  for  the  thermometer  being 
so  low  as  64^ 

24M. — ^We  were  five  hom-s  this  morning  in  coming  to 
Aliabad  Serai  from  Hirpore ;  the  coolies  took  nine  hours, 
distance  eleven  miles.  The  road  is  bad  generally,  and  many 
parts  are  much  worse  than  anything  met  with  on  the  Morree 
route.  We  have  ascended  1500  feet  in  coming  from  Hirpore, 
this  place  standing  at  about  9000  feet  above  the  sea.  During 
a  great  part  of  to-day's  journey  we  had  the  Rembiara  river  in 
sight ;  we  crossed  it  on  crazy  bridges  four  times.  At  present 
it  is  nothing  more  than  a  brawling  brook,  bat  it  becomes  a 
considerable  stream  at  the  commencement  of  summer.  Down 
near  Hirpore  it  has  opened  up  for  itself  a  great  breadth 
through  the  valley,  but  its  bed  gets  narrower  after  leaving 
Hirpore ;  and  here,  and  for  many  miles  lower  down,  it  is 
penned  into  a  narrow  space  by  lofty  mountains  on  both  sides* 
The  mountain  scenery  between  this  and  Hirpore  is  imposing. 
On  the  right  bank  of  the  river  the  mountains  are  clothed 
with  fir  and  birch  almost  to  the  summit,  and  there  is  a  sprink- 
ling also  on  the  left  bank.  This  Aliabad  Serai  is  one  of  many, 
of  which  the  ruins  exist,  built  by  the  Mogul  emperors,  as 
rest-houses  for  themselves  and  their  dependents  in  their 
journeys  firom  the  plains  to  the  hill  country.  The  one  at 
which  I  am  now  staying  is  in  a  capital  state  of  preservation, 
quite  intact  indeed.  The  building,  of  stone,  encloses  a  good- 
sized  quadrangle,  into  which  all  the  rooms  open,  of  which 
the  three  principal  are  devoted  to  the  use  of  travellers  ;  they 
are  large,  high,  and  elaborately  ornamented.  I  don't  know 
what  the  Mogul  who  built  it  would  say  if  he  could  see  me 
here  now  as  I  am  writing  up  this  journal,  with  a  blazing 
birch-fire  burning  on  the  floor,  the  flame  running  up  the 
already  blackened  walls ;  but  it  is  cold  here,  so  I  trust, 
should  he  be  in  a  position  to  look  down  upon  me,  he  won't 
be  angry.  There  is  snow  close  at  hand ;  indeed,  we  passed 
some  covered  with  mud  on  the  road  as  we  came  up  to-day. 

2bthj  Barramgulcu — At  6.30  we  were  in  the  saddle  at 
Aliabad  Serai,  and  it  took  us  three  and  a  half  hours  to 
Poshiana,  nine  and  a  half  miles.  We  have  crossed  in  this 
day's  journey  the  Pir  Punjal,  said  to  be  11,400  feet  above 
the  sea,  though  my  aneroid  makes  the  pass  only  9700  feet. 


456    PIR  PUNJAL—BARRAMGULA—PIR  RUTTIM. 

This  is  a  great  difference :  an  error  somevbere.  The  road  is 
very  roagh,  bat  it  leads  throogh  magDiScent  sceoery.  At 
Posbiana  we  remained  one  bonr,  and  then  started  for  onr  pre- 
sent resting-place,  seven  miles,  which  we  reached  in  two  and 
a  half  hoars.  Two  miles  of  this  last  road  lead  np  and  down 
rugged  hills,  and  the  remaioiDg  five  miles  we  passed  in  the 
bed  of  the  river  Soorun,  crossing  and  recrossing  that  rapid 
stream,  an  operation  which  we  had  to  perform  no  less  than 
twenty-five  times,  over  as  many  very  fragile  bridges.  The  gorge 
through  which  this  river  flows  is  not  more  than  fifty  yards 
wide  anywhere  in  the  whole  five  mQes ;  high  moontains 
close  it  in  on  both  sides,  wooded  to  the  top,  and  in  the 
narrower  parts  the  limeatoue  hills  come  down  and  overhang 
the  little  rocky  path  that  mns  between  them  and  the  river 
itself,  and  this  dripping  cliff  was  full  of  aiich  variety  of  ferns 
and  flowers. 

Barramgula  is  a  small  village  in  the  dominion  of  the  Rajah 
Hotee  Sing,  who  owns  all  the  territory  lying  between  the 
Pir  Pniyal  and  Pir  Rottim.  It  consists  of  a  do«n  or  two 
flat-roofed  houses,  sitnated  npoo  a  small  plateau  in  the  midst 
of  lofty  moantains  of  great  variety  of  shape,  mostly  covered 
to  the  very  top  with  fir  and  many  other  kinds  of  trees,  but  no 
deodar.  The  present  travellers' bnngalo  wis  amnd  bailding,con- 
taining  some  half-dozen  or  more  rooms,  all  opening  intoaconrt- 
yard  in  the  centre.  It  is  a  miserable  place,  and  so  the  Bajah 
seems  to  think,  for  be  baa  collected  together  the  materials, 
stone,  wood,  and  mortar,  for  building  a  new  bungalow  for 
visitors,  more  suited  to  their  requirements.  It  is  difficult  to 
nuderstand  how  the  inhabitants  of  these  two  villi^s  manage 
to  live,  for  Poehiana  is,  like  Barramgula,  buried  in  among 
the  mountains,  with  hardly  an  acre  of  cultivable  ground 
within  reach  of  it.  If  all  the  R^ah's  territory  is  like  these 
two  fiat-roofed  villages,  the  revenue  be  draws  from  it  must  be 
very  small.  This  morning,  when  I  got  np  at  Aliabad  Sersi, 
Iht'  Iheriiiomettr  in  my  ruom  stood  at  54'. 

26(A,  I'kunna  Mundu — Got  nwsy  from  Barramgula  st 
7  A^ll.,  jud  reached  thix  place  in  fi^  e  hours,  distance  nine 
IhiB  Battim  Pir  ranj^e,  which  we  began  to 
dyon  leiiving  the  bungalow,  occupied 
Jlhd  ftininiit  of  Uic   paes.     The  ro«d  i* 


THUNNA  MUNDI— RAJAH  MO  TEE  SING,      457 

the  very  worst  I  have  seen  among  these  mountains,  and  does 
the  Bajah  no  credit.  On  this  side  the  road  is  better,  and  the 
descent  more  gradnaL  In  its  whole  coarse  it  passes  over  either 
roots  of  trees  or  large  stones.  We  must  have  met  in  crossing 
at  least  a  couple  of  hundred  bullocks  laden  with  salt,  two 
mannds  each,  160  lbs.,  on  their  way  to  the  Kashmir  valley.  The 
pass  of  the  Ruttim  Pir  range  is  said  to  be  8200  feet  high  ;  my 
aneroid  makes  it  only  7800  feet  The  mountain  is  covered  with 
timber.  Thunna  Mundi  is  an  insignificant  little  town  of  flat-^ 
roofed  houses,  built  at  the  mouth  of  the  gorge  which  leads  up 
to  the  Ruttim  Fir  range,  and  serves  as  a  depdt  for  salt  on  its 
way  from  the  Punjaub  to  Kashmir.  One  mile  to  the  east- 
ward is  the  village  of  Thunna,  a  much  larger  place  than 
the  town.  It  contains  an  old  Hindoo  temple,  furnished  with 
a  lingam,  and  nothing  more.  The  inhabitants  of  this  part  of 
Rajah  Motee  Sing's  territory  look  half  starved,  and  I  daresay 
they  are :  it  took  eight  of  them  to-day  to  bring  my  luggage  nine 
miles,  which  seven  Kashmirians  brought  sixteen  miles  yester- 
day. Endeavoured  to  get  a  sovereign  changed,  but  did  not 
succeed ;  they  have  nothing  but  the  base  chilkee  in  circula- 
tion ;  they  understand  nothing  about  the  value  of  our  sove- 
reigns. 

21  th^  Rampore. — A  five  hours*  ride  this  morning  brought 
U8  from  Thunna  Mundi  to  this  place.  The  road  leads  the 
whole  way  down  the  valley  of  the  Tawi,  and  alongside  the 
river,  which  is  a  rapid  mountain  stream.  The  descent  on 
the  whole  distance  of  thirteen  miles  may  be  about  2000  feet. 
Rampore,  by  my  aneroid,  is  about  4200  feet  above  the  sea ; 
but  by  Montgomery's  route-map  the  height  of  it  is  only 
3090  feet.  The  travellers'  apartments  are  in  an  old  Mogul 
building  overlooking  the  river,  and  probably  150  feet  above 
it:  it  is  opposite  the  town,  which  is  on  the  other  and  right 
bank  of  the  river.  The  Mogul  building  stands  at  the  bottom 
of  a  large  garden,  and  all  the  apparatus  for  waterworks 
still  exist,  but  there  is  no  water  laid  on  to  them.  The 
building  is  stanch  and  strong,  and  will  last  for  another 
hundred  years  or  more  without  requiring  much  to  be  done  to 
it  There  are  high  hills  in  front  of  us  and  at  the  back  also, 
but  round  about  there  is  a  considerable  extent  of  plain 
under  rice  cultivation. 


4S8  RAMPORE^CEMETERIES. 

Ever  since  I  left  Islamabad,  I  have  been  endeayouring  to 
get  change  for  a  sovereign,  to  enable  me  to  pay  my  way 
whilst  I  am  escaping  from  the  dominion  of  the  Maharajah  of 
Kashmir.     To-day,  being  nearly  at  the  end  of  my  tether,  it 
was  necessary  to  make  a  desperate  effort  to  obtain  it ;  so  as 
soon  as  a  thunderstorm,  which  had    commenced   half  an 
hour  after  I  had  got  under  shelter,  had  subsided,  I  started 
with   the    head   man   of  this   establishment  and   my  own 
servant,  to  ford  the  river,  and  see  what  I  could  obtain  at  the 
to?m.     Fording  the  Tawi  was  no  joke.    The  stream  is  a  rapid, 
flowing  over  large  round   and   loose  smooth  and  slippery 
stones.     The  man  who  undertook  to  carry  me  across  on  his 
back,  with  the  assistance  of  a  second  man  who  walked  by 
his  side,  was  a  mere  threadpaper  of  a  fellow,  and  I  felt, 
whilst  crossing,  that  any  moment  I  might  get  a  good  duck- 
ing.     It  was  then  I  thought  of  my  watch  and  my  aneroid, 
both  in  my  pocket,  not  to  mention  the  papers  in  my  pocket- 
book;  and  I  began  to  think  the  getting  this  change  might  be 
a  costly  affair  for  me.     The  threadpaper  of  a  man,  however, 
landed  me  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river  all  right,  and  we 
commenced  at  once  to  ascend  the  150  feet  of  hill  that  stood 
between  the  river  and  the  town.     Our  guide  took  us  direct 
to  the  money-changer,  who,  after  weighing  the  sovereign  and 
trying  it  upon  a  touchstone,  and  ultimately  obtaining  the 
opinion  of  one  who  pretended  to  understand  such  matters, 
the  fellow  offered  me  nine  rupees  for  my  sovereign,  which  I 
indignantly  refused.     A  deal  of  talk  followed,  and  ultimately 
I  parted  with  it  for  nine  and  a  half  rupees  or  19s.     This 
matter  settled,  my  mind  was  at  ease;  I  had  now  change 
sufficient  to  carry  me  into  British  India.     So  away  I  started 
to  look  at  the  wonders  of  Rampore.     I  found  them  to  con- 
sist of  the  ruins  of  two  old  serais,  and  a  cemetery  contain- 
ing the  tombs  of  many  native  kings,  all  covered  pretty  nearly 
with  rank  weeds.     This  cemetery  was  not  enclosed,  but  one 
alongside  of  it,  containing  the  tombs  of  the  king's  wives, 
was  surrounded  by  a  high  wall,  for  even  in  death,  it  would 
seem,  these  potentates  would  keep  their  wives  screened  from 
vulgar  gaze  1     I  returned  to  the  river.    This  time,  before  re- 
crossing,  I  protected  my  aneroid  by  wrapping  it  up  in  many 
folds  of  a  handkerchief;  but  the  precaution  was  unnecessaiy, 


J^AMPORE—CB UNCUS— RIVER  TAWL         459 

for  threadpaper  recroBsed  ^vith  me  without  making  a  single 
false  step.  The  town  is  a  poor  place ;  narrow  streets,  and 
tumbledown  houses.  Looking  at  it  from  a  distance,  or  even 
from  our  quarters  in  the  MoguPs  pavilion,  Rampore  haa 
rather  an  imposing  appearance,  but  it  is  a  delusion  which 
passes  away  with  a  nearer  and  more  intimate  acquaintance. 
For  our  journey  from  Thunna  Mundi  to-day  we  were  obliged 
to  put  up  with  mules.  I  came  on  pretty  well  with  mine, 
but  my  servant  was  obliged  to  abandon  his  a  few  minutes 
after  mounting,  and  had  to  walk  the  thirteen  miles.  We 
have  just  had  another  sharp  thunderstorm ;  these  visitations 
come  on  very  suddenly  among  the  mountains,  and  generally 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  day. 

28^A,  Chungus. — We  got  away  to-day  from  the  Mogul's 
pavilion  about  seven  o'clock,  and  proceeded  by  a  road  leading 
to  a  ford  a  mile  from  the  town.  The  Tawi  is  an  ugly  river 
to  ford  when  swollen,  as  it  is  now,  and  so  I  found  to  my 
cost.  My  pony  was  a  willing  little  thing,  but  not  much 
bigger  or  stronger  than  a  good-sized  rat ;  but  it  took  to  the 
water  like  a  Newfoundland  dog,  following  a  scarecrow  of  a 
Kashmirian,  whose  duty  it  was  to  assist  on  all  occasions  on 
the  road.  This  scarecrow,  who  pretended  to  know  the  ford 
better  than  the  coolies  who  were  crossing  before  him,  took  a 
road  of  his  own,  and  my  brave  pony  followed  him  unhesi- 
tatingly, but  it  was  not  long  before  pony  and  scarecrow  both 
came  to  a  stand-still.  We  had  got  into  too  deep  water,  and 
were  obliged  to  sing  out  for  help.  My  servant  came  to 
our  assistance,  and  we  soon  began  to  make  way  again,  but 
we  had  hardly  moved  when  my  pony  became  buried,  all  but 
his  nose.  I  was  down  to  the  armpits,  but  I  stuck  to  the 
pony  whilst  he  struggled  until  he  had  regained  his  footing. 
We  had  now  a  little  episode  whilst  in  the  water,  my  man 
abusing  the  scarecrow  in  Hindostanee,  and  I  abusing  him  in 
English,  for  his  ignorance  of  the  ford,  of  neither  of  which 
languages  did  the  scarecrow  understand  a  word,  nor  did  we 
understand  a  word  of  his  rejoinder,  which  was  in  Kashmirian. 
Whilst  this  was  goiAg  on  we  were  making  progress,  though 
but  slowly,  and  at  last,  without  further  serious  mishap,  we  . 
reached  the  shore.  We  had  been  half  an  hour  in  crossing  ' 
this  river,  which  was  not  more  than  twenty-five  yards  wid^ 


46o  TIRED  PONY— CHUNG  US. 

These  rivers,  in  the  rainy  season  and  in  the  spring,  when  the 
melting  snow  in  the  mountains  sends  down  large  volumes  of 
water,  form  one  of  the  chief  difficulties  to  the  traveller  in 
these  parte.     It  was  only  the  other  day  that  a  party  was 
detained  four  days  at  Bampore  by  the  swollen  state  of  this 
ordinarily  insignificant  stream,  and  only  a  month  or  two  ago 
that  an  ayah  and  child  were  drowned  in  crossing.     We  were 
five  and  a  half  hours  in  coming  twelve  and  a  half  miles,  and 
a  pedestrian  who  is  also  travelling   this  way,  and  started 
with  me  from  Rampore,  was  seven  hours  on  the  road.     My 
poor  little  pony  knocked  up  when  he  had  performed  half  the 
journey.    Three  times  he  came  down  flat  on  his  belly ;  and 
if  I  had  not  dismounted,  and  allowed  him  untranmielled  to 
struggle  to  his  feet  again,  he  would  have  remained    there 
until   awakened  up   by  the  sound  of   the  trumpet  coming 
from  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat !    Though  very  unwillingly, 
I  was  obliged  to  trust  to  my  own  pins  for  the  last  half  of 
the  day's  journey.     It  was  a  tiresome  walk,  over  a  succes- 
sion of  rocky  spurs,  and  one  feels  the  walk  more  from  coming 
every  hour  into  warmer  weather.       I  was  not  rigged   for 
walking,  and  by  the  time  I  reached  the  bungalow  at  Chungus, 
my  woollen  clothing  was  as  soaked  as  B.*8  Nova  Scotian 
home-spun  cloth   when  he  tumbled  overboard   following  a 
kellic  in  the  Bay  of  Moscodooit     There  is  a  village  called 
Chungus  somewhere  about  here,  though  I  have  not  yet  seen 
it     Next  door   to  this  bungalow  is   a  Mogul  serai,  in  a 
capital  state  of  preservation.      The  outside  wall,  built  of 
large  pebbles,  is  about  twenty  feet  high,  and  encloses,  I 
should  say,  good  two  acres  of  ground.    There  is  a  division  in 
this  serai  which  I  have  not  seen  in  any  other — ^its  great 
extent  permitted  it  perhaps  ;  a  high  wall  separates  from  the 
rest  of  the  quadrangle  a  portion  of  the  space,  set  apart  most 
likely  for  the  accommodation  of  royal  personages,  for  the 
grand  entrances  on  both  sides  enter  into  it.     Around  this 
separated  part  are   rows   of  open   apartments   leading  to 
interior  rooms.    Around  the  main  part  of  the  building  are 
rooms  also,  but  with  no  other  light  than  that  admitted  by 
an  open  door.      These  rooms  were  doubtless  occupied  by 
dependents.     The  scenery  round  about  here  is  pretty,  but 
not  grand.     There  are  no  mountains  to  be  seen,  but  there  is 


NAOSHERA— MOGUL  SERAIS-SILVERSMITHS.    461 

DO  end  to  diversified  hills  clothed  with  timber.     The  height 
of  this  place,  by  my  aneroid,  is  about  3500  feet. 

29thj  Naoshercu — I  spent  three  and  a  qnarter  hoars  this 
morning  in  coming  here  from  Chungus,  a  distance  of  eleven 
miles.  My  pedestrian  companion  took  seven  hours  over  it 
The  road  for  the  most  part  lies  over  rocky  spurs  :  in  all, 
there  are  ten  of  them,  varying  from  fifty  to  150  feet  Now 
and  then  the  road  took  me  close  down  to  the  Tawi.  Indeed, 
I  was  always  within  sight  or  hearing  of  that  noisy  river, 
which  runs  from  end  to  end  of  the  narrow  valley  bearing  the 
same  name.  The  scenery  is  pretty  :  low  hills  on  both  sides, 
clothed  with  firs,  walnut,  and  a  variety  of  other  trees,  among 
which  I  observed  an  acacia,  dressed  out  in  a  profusion  of 
pink  and  white  buttons,  very  delicate  and  pretty.  We  passed 
one  large  Mogul  serai  on  the  road,  with  both  entrances  blocked 
up.  The  serais  are  met  with  every  five  or  six  miles  along  this 
route,  by  which  the  Mogul  princes,  with  their  families  and 
dependents,  used  to  travel  into  Kashmir  from  India  in  the 
Bummer  months.  The  town  of  Naoshera,  distant  about  a 
mile,  and  through  which  I  passed  to  reach  this  bungalow, 
contains  a  large  serai,  a  portion  of  which  is  made  habitable 
for  the  Wazeer  or  governor  of  the  district.  I  have  just  returned 
from  a  second  visit  to  the  town,  where  I  managed  to  change 
a  sovereign  at  a  goldsmith's  for  its  full  value.  At  the  same 
time  I  bought  a  pair  of  silver  nose-rings  and  a  looking-glass 
finger-ring,  also  of  silver.  The  silversmiths  hereabouts 
work  very  cheaply.  The  workmanship  of  these  rings,  in 
fixing  their  value,  was  set  down  at  eight  annas,  or  one  shil- 
ling. If  labour  is  cheap,  some  other  things  are  very  dear :  I 
have  just  paid  a  shilling  for  half-a-pound  of  brown  sugar. 
The  bungalow,  a  square  building,  containing  four  good-sized 
rooms  and  four  smaller  ones,  with  a  wide  corridor  running 
all  roand  it,  stands  in  an  orchard  of  many  acres,  thickly 
planted  with  fruit-trees,  but  all  in  disorder.  By  the  by,  in 
our  yesterday's  journey  the  whole  route  was  lined  with  fruit- 
trees,  principally  pomegranates.  It  is  a  great  matter,  I  find, 
in  travelling  among  these  hills,  to  make  an  early  start,  so  as 
to  arrive  by  times  at  the  night's  rest-house ;  for  every  day, 
soon  after  noon,  we  are  favoured  with  a  thunderstorm, 
accompanied,  whilst  it  lasts,  by  a  heavy  down-pour  of  rain. 


462  SAIDABAD. 

It  is  this  that  prevents  me  from  always  making  two  marches  (as 
)  they  are  called  here),  or  about  twenty-five  miles  a  day,  instead 

I  of  one-half  that  distance.    There   is  a  storm  raging  now, 

which  is  very  pleasant  for  the  traveller  who  has  a  roof  oTer 
his  head,  for  it  cools  the  atmosphere.  My  aneroid  makes 
Naoshera  2800  feet  above  the  sea ;  and  the  thermometer  on 
the  table  nnder  the  corridor  marks  80^ 

29M. — The  cultivable  ground  one  meets  coming  here 
from  Chungus  is  not  of  much  extent;  what  there  is,  is 
under  rice,  cotton,  and  indian-corn.  These  hills  are  not 
calculated  to  sustain  a  large  population,  and  the  dwellers 
among  them  are  miserable  specimens  of  humanity,  half- 
starved,  weakly-looking  creatures.  It  takes  half  as  many 
again  of  them  to  carry  my  luggage  as  was  required  for  the 
purpose  in  the  valley  of  Kashmir  and  its  immediate  neigh- 
bourhood. All  along  the  road  from  Poshiana  to  this  place, 
the  coolies  look  as  if  they  were  only  the  first  remove  from, 
probably,  our  progenitors,  the  apes ;  they  are  wanting  as  much 
in  mental  as  in  physical  capacity. 

Z^th^  Saidabad, — The  distance  from  this  place  to  Nao- 
shera  is  ten  miles,  which  I  accomplished  this  morning  in 
three  and  a  quarter  hours.  The  road  lies  over  the  range  of 
hills  called  the  Kuman  Qdshi,  and  the  pass  is  about  4000 
feet  high.  The  ascent  is  long  and  tiresome,  the  path  being 
very  rocky.  The  whole  eastern  slopes  of  these  hills  are 
covered  with  fine  fir-trees,  to  the  exclusion  of  almost  all 
others.  The  descent  on  this  side  is  short,  and  the  path  leads 
over  smooth  slate.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  cultivation  on 
both  sides  of  these  hills;  indian-corn  and  cotton  princi- 
pally. We  crossed  some  small  streams  in  our  way  some 
dozens  of  times,  but  they  offer  no  difficulty  to  the  traveller  at 
present.  A  large  Mogul  serai,  in  a  good  state  of  preser- 
vation, is  not  far  from  us,  whilst  our  own  bungalow  is  built 
within  the  precincts  of  another  serai,  in  a  state  of  utter  rain. 
To-morrow  we  should  reach  Bhimbur,  the  last  stage  in, 
Kashmirian  territory.  This  place  must  be  about  3000  feet 
above  the  sea;  the  white  jessamine,  very  common  all  along 
the  route ;  and  here,  close  to  the  bungalow,  there  are  some 
patches  of  a  large  yellow  jessamine,  which  scent  the  air  for  a 
'H>d  distance  round.    We  passed  the  wreck  of  several  stone 


BHIMBVR—ADHEE  DHUK  RANGE.  463 

bridges  to-day :  in  fact,  there  are  rtiins  everywhere,  demon- 
fitrating  what  a  different  race  of  rulers  must  have  held 
dominion  in  this  country  in  other  days.  The  present  inhabi- 
tants might  be  said  to  be  dwellers  in  huts. 

Zlstj  Bhitniur. — I  was  three  and  a  half  hours  in  coming 
to  this  place,  distance  twelve  miles.  We  had  to  cross  the 
Adhee  Dhuk  range  of  hills,  of  which  the  pass  is  about  1500 
feet  above  the  plain  on  which  this  town  stands,  and  nearly 
4000  feet  above  the  sea.  The  road  on  the  eastern  side  is 
very  rough,  and  on  the  western  side  only  a  little  less  so.  The 
eastern  side  is  clothed  with  firs  principally,  and  only  a  sprink- 
ling on  the  western  side.  After  reaching  the  western  side  of 
the  Adhee  Dhuk  there  is  a  long,  five  to  six  mile,  tiresome 
ride  over  the  rocky  bed  of  a  river,  and  which  we  had  to  cross 
and  recroBS  a  dozen  times.  The  patches  of  cultivation  are 
maize  principally ;  close  to  Bhimbur  I  noticed  some  sugar- 
cane growing.  This  is  the  last  Kashmirian  town  on  this 
frontier.  To-morrow's  journey,  to  Goograt  will  be  in  British 
India,  twenty-eight  and  a  half  miles.  Height  of  Bhimbur 
about  2100  feet ;  thermometer  under  the  corridor  of  this 
bungalow  90^ 


Dekd  of  Transfer  of  Kashmir  to  thb  Bajah  Golab  Sing. 

Kashmir  is  an  Asiatic  province  situated  on  the  northern 
side  of  the  Pir  Funjal  portion  of  the  great  Himalayan 
mountains.  It  constitutes  a  part  of  the  territories  of  his 
Highness  Bhunbheer  Sing,  the  Maharajah  of  Jummoo  and 
Kashmir,  son  of  the  late  Golab  Sing,  to  whom  it  was  trans- 
ferred by  the  British  Gt)vernment  in  March  1 846,  The  follow- 
ing is  the  deed  of  transfer : — 

Treaty  between  the  British  Government  on  the  one  part, 
and  Maharajah  Golab  Sing  of  Jummoo  on  the  other,  concluded 
on  the  part  of  the  British  Government  by  Frederick  Currie, 
Esq.,  and  Brevet-Major  Henry  Montgomery  Laurence,  acting 
under  the  orders  of  the  Right  Honourable  Sir  Henry  Hardinge, 
Q.C.B.,  one  of  H.  B.  Majesty's  Honourable  Privy  Council, 
Governor- (General,  appointed  by  the  Honourable-  Company  to 


464    DEED  OF  TRANSFER  OR  SALE  OF  KASHMIR. 

direct  and  cootrol  all  their  affairs  in  the  East  Indies,  and  by 
Maharajah  Golab  Sing  in  person. 

Abticlk  Ist. — ^The  British  Gh)yemment  transfers  and 
makes  over  for  ever,  in  independent  possession,  to 
Maharajah  Qolab  Sing,  and  to  his  heirs-male  of  his 
body,  all  the  hilly  or  monntainons  conntry,  with  its 
dependencies,  situated  on  the  eastward  of  the  river 
Indus,  and  westward  of  the  river  Bdvee,  including 
Chumba,  and  excluding  Lahoul,  being  part  of  the 
territory  ceded  to  the  British  Qovernment  by  the 
Lahore  State,  according  to  the  provisions  of  Article 
4  of  the  Treaty  of  Lahore,  dated  9ih  March  1846. 

Abticle  2nd. — ^The  eastern  boundary  of  the  tract  trans- 
ferred by  the  foregoing  article  to  Maharajah  Gh)lab 
Sing  shall  be  laid  down  by  CommissioDers  appointed 
by  the  British  Gk>vernment  and  Maharajah  Gk>lab 
Sing  respectively  for  that  purpose,  and  shall  he  de- 
fined in  a  separate  engagement  after  survey. 

Article  3rd. — In  consideration  of  the  transfer  made  to 
him  and  his  heirs  by  the  provisions  of  the  foiegoiDg 
articles,  Maharajah  Qolab  Sing  will  pay  to  the  British 
Qovernment  the  sum  of  seventy-five  lacs  of  rupees 
(nanukshahee).  Fifty  lacs  to  be  paid  on  ratifica- 
tion of  this  treaty,  and  twenty-five  lacs  on  or  before 
the  1st  October  of  the  current  year,  iuD.  1846. 

Abticle  4th. — The  limits  of  the  territories  of  Maharajah 
Qolab  Sing  shall  not  be  at  any  time  changed  with- 
out the  concurrence  of  the  British  Qovernment 

Article  5th. — Maharajah  Grolab  Sing  will  refer  to  the 
arbitration  of  the  British  Qovernment  any  disputes 
or  questions  that  may  arise  between  himself  and  the 
Qovernment  of  Lahore,  or  any  other  neighbouring 
State,  and  will  abide  by  the  decision  of  the  British 
Qovernment 

Article  6th. — Maharajah  Qolab  Sing  engages,  for  him* 
self  and  heirs,  to  join,  with  the  whole  of  his  military 
force,  the  British  troops  when  employed  within  the 
hills,  or  in  the  territories  adjoining  his  possessions. 

Article  7th. — Maharajah  Qolab  Sing  engages  never  to 
take,  or  retain  in  his  service,  any  British  subject, 


TRANSFER  OF  KASHMIR,  465 

Dor  the  subject  of  any  European  or  American  State^ 
without  the  consent  of  the  British  Government. 

Article  8th. — Maharajah  Golab  Sing  engages  to  respect, 
in  regard  to  the  territory  transferred  to  him,  the 
provisions  of  Articles  5,  6,  and  7  of  the  separate 
engagement  between  the  British  Government  and  the 
Lahore  Durbar,  dated  11th  August  1846. 

Article  9th. — The  British  Government  will  give  its  aid 
to  Maharajah  Golab  Sing  in  protecting  his  territories 
from  external  enemies. 

ARTiciiB  10th. — Maharajah  Golab  Sing  acknowledges  the 
supremacy  of  the  British  Government,  and  will,  in 
token  of  such  supremacy,  present  annually  to  the 
British  Government  one  horse,  twelve  perfect  shawl 
goats  of  approved  breed  (six  male  and  six  female), 
and  three  pairs  of  Kashmir  shawls. 

This  treaty,  consisting  of  ten  articles,  has  been  this  day 
settled  by  Frederick  Currie,  Esq.,  and  Brevet-Major  Henry 
Montgomery  Laurence,  acting  under  the  direction  of  the 
Bight  Honourable  Sir  Henry  Hardinge,  G.C.B.,  Governor- 
General,  on  the  part  of  the  British  Government,  and  by 
Maharajah  Golab  Sing  in  person;  and  the  said  treaty  has 
been  this  day  ratified  by  the  seal  of  the  Right  Honourable 
Sir  Henry  Hardinge,  G.C.B.,  Governor- General.  Done  at 
Umritsar  this  16th  day  of  March,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord 
1846,  corresponding  with  the  17th  day  of  Rubbee  ool  Awul, 
1762,  Hijree. 


2  o 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

British  IndiA— Qoojrat— To  Lahore  by  hone-dak— Good  roadi— Train  for  Denii-;- 
PreMot  earriagei  not  luited  to  India — Umballah— Kalka — Simlah — Magoetie 
obaeryatory—Poatman— Church — Police  occurrenccH-Oholera  aevere — Art-Unioa 
opened  by  Lord  Nurthbrook — Govemmeot  posting — Delhi — "Paging**  too 
much  for  health — ^Kick  and  caff  ■ervantS'-PabUo  notice  aa  to  how  they  are  to 
behave— Our  holding  India  dependa  on  the  army— Hatred  of  the  native*— Kootnb 
Minar,  highest  pillar  in  the  world — Divera  at  Mehrowlie  Well— Siege  of  Delhi, 
1857— Feros  Shah's  pillar— Birds  nor  smaller  animals  molested— Women  wear 
the  breeches— Fine  men — The  law  at  least  protects  natives — Museum — Mnsenm  at 
Victoria—  The  Oueen'sGardena— Menagene— Agr»— The  Tkr-^Bombay— Drunken 
Englishmen— Theological  views  of  native  doctor— Missionariea  do  good  through 
schools— Some  Hindoos  become  Christians  to  eat  meat —The  fakir;  suraesded 
animation— Deiim  among  Hindoos — The  weaver-bird- Tenacity  of  Hinooos  as 
to  caste. 

September  2rf,  Goqjratj  British  India. — ^Abont  two  hours 
and  ten  minutes  brought  me  yesterday  from  Bhimbur  to 
Eotla,  and  two  hours  more  in  the  afternoon  took  me  to 
Dowlatnugger ;  from  this  last-named  place  I  came  on  to 
Goojrat  this  morning  in  three  hours.  The  road,  twenty- 
eight  and  a  half  miles,  is  good  all  through,  and  with  the 
exception  of  the  sandy  bed  of  the  Bhimbur,  now  without 
one  drop  of  water  in  it,  the  whole  is  over  a  plain.  It  was 
in  crossing  this  now  entirely  dry  river  that  an  ayah  and  child 
were  drowned  only  two  months  before.  Fields  of  maize  on 
both  sides  of  the  whole  road,  twenty-eight  and  a  half  miles, 
and  an  avenue  of  acacias  nearly  the  whole  way.  The  road 
is  straight,  and  must  be  a  hundred  feet  wide.  Many  villages 
are  met  with,  and  an  air  of  comfort  pervades  the  whole  route, 
very  different  from  what  one  has  just  left  behind  in  Kashmir. 
This  is  a  grand  civil  station,  and  the  bungalow  large  and 
well  furnished,  and,  for  India,  replete  with  comforts.  I  have 
just  called  an  auction  to  dispose  of  my  tent,  pots  and  pans, 
chairs  and  table,  and  truckle-bed,  and  a  man  from  the 
bazaar,  with  a  couple  of  dozen  buyers  round  him,  is  now 
busy  realising.  The  remainder  of  the  journey  to  Lahore 
will  be  done  by  horse-dak,  and  I  start  to-morrow  morning 
at  4  A.U.    Mine  and  my  companion's  servant  left  Bhimbor 


GOOJRA  T^LAHORE^DELHL  467 

on  horseback  yesterday,  a  few  minutes  after  I  had  left  for 
Kotia,  where  we  were  to  lunch ;  and  for  want  of  inqniriDg  as 
they  came  along,  they  passed  the  first  bungalow  at  Eotla, 
where  we  were  expecting  them,  and  where  they  ought  to 
have  stopped ;  but  on  they  went,  and  never  did  stop  until 
they  reached  the  bungalow  at  Dowlatnugger,  ten  miles  farther 
on :  there  they  found  out  their  mistake,  and  had  to  retrace 
their  steps,  and  arrived  at  Eotla  just  as  we,  tired  of  waiting 
for  them,  were  starting  for  Dowlatnugger.  So  they  had  to 
turn  round  and  accompany  us,  and  consequently,  in  place  of 
twenty  miles  for  their  day's  work,  they  summed  up  forty 
before  they  went  to  bed.  The  next  time  they  travel  an  un- 
known road  they  will,  I  think,  not  fail  to  inquire  the  way. 

This  place  seems  to  be  about  1900  feet  above  the  sea. 
Weather  dry  and  cloudy  ;  thermometer  89**. 

3^,  Lahore. — Left  Goojrat  at  four  this  morning,  and 
arrived  at  the  dak-bungalow  at  6.30  p.m.  Crossing  the 
Chenaub  took  us  two  hours,  and  afterwards  I  stopped  an 
hour  to  get  breakfast.  There  was  a  nice  breeze  blowing  all 
day,  which  tempered  the  heat.  The  road  all  the  way  is 
macadamised,  equal  to  any  public  road  in  England.  It  is  a 
portion  of  the  Grand  Trunk  Road,  which  extends,  I  believe, 
from  Lahore  to  Peshawur,  210  miles.  The  line  of  railway 
in  course  of  construction  will  run  side  by  side  with  the  road. 
They  tell  me  the  foundations  for  the  piers,  now  being  made 
for  the  bridge  across  the  Chenaub,  are  seventy  feet  deep. 
At  about  sixty-six  feet  they  reach  clay,  into  which  they  go 
down  four  feet,  and  in  excavating  these  last  four  feet,  they 
spend  as  much  as  for  the  sixty-six  feet.  The  gauge  of  the 
rail  is  to  be  three  feet  three  inches.  It  will  take  two  years 
or  more  to  complete  the  line  from  Lahore  to  Bawul  Pindee, 
1 70  miles.  The  Jhelum  has  to  be  bridged — ^a  work,  they 
say,  which  will  be  very  troublesome. 

6^^,  Delhi. — On  the  5th,  at  2.45  a.m.,  I  took  the  Pan- 
jaub  train  at  Lahore  for  Delhi,  and  arrived  here  this  morning 
at  five  o'clock,  having  been  26^  hours  on  the  road.  The 
river  Beas  we  passed  partly  on  a  trestle-bridge,  but  the 
Sutlej  we  passed  in  boats,  one  of  the  piers  of  the  bridge, 
one  and  a  quarter  miles  long,  having  been  swept  away  by 
the  late  -floods.     The  Gugger  we  passed  on  a  temporary 


468  DELHI— UMBALLAH. 

bridge  in  trollies.  The  journey  was  a  most  tiresome  one, 
and  I  was  heartily  glad  when  it  came  to  an  end.  I  dislike 
railway  travelling  everywhere,  but  upon  these  Indian  lines 
more  than  anywhere  else.  The  carriages  on  this  Punjanb 
line  seem  as  if  they  were  built  for  a  cold  climate.  They  are 
like  our  old  and  worst  carriages  in  use  in  England,  close 
and  very  dirty.  You  never  can  find  anybody  whose  duty  it 
is  to  assist  passengers.  As  for  the  station-master,  he  may 
be  seen  usually  on  the  platform,  looking  as  if  the  whole  con- 
cern, train,  platform,  and  passengers,  were  all  his  own  pro- 
perty, seldom  deigning  to  trouble  himself  about  anything 
that  is  going  on.  In  fact,  the  Europeans  filling  subordinate 
situations  in  India  are  hardly  installed  in  office  when  they 
begin  to  think  themselves  equal  to,  and  capable  of  giving 
advice  to,  the  Grovernor-General  himself;  and  this  uppishness 
I  take  to  be  the  result  of  feeling  that  they  wield  unlimited 
power  over  the  native  population,  by  whom,  in  return,  they 
are  thoroughly  hated. 

9th. — Yesterday,  at  4.30  p.m.,  left  Delhi  by  rail  for  Um- 
ballah,  on  my  way  to  Simlah.  Arrived  at  TTmballah  at  1.30 
A.U.,  and  went  to  the  Boyal  Hotel,  where  I  slept,  and  after 
breakfast  left  by  horse-dak  at  10.30  for  Kalka  (48  miles), 
where  I  arrived  at  4.30  p.m.  Ealka  is  a  town  at  the  very 
foot  of  the  hills,  up  which  I  have  to  travel  to-morrow  towards 
Simlah.  The  road  from  Delhi  to  TTmballah,  and  the  road  fit)m 
TTmballah  to  Ealka,  to  all  appearance  when  travelling  over 
them,  seem  to  be  as  flat  as  your  hand,  nevertheless  there  is 
a  rise  on  the  whole  distance  of  some  300  feet  Kalka,  by 
my  aneroid,  is  about  2000  feet  above  the  sea.  The  road 
from  TTmballah  to  Ealka  is  excellent  all  the  way,  excepting 
where  the  beds  of  two  rivers  have  to  be  crossed,  and  there 
it  is  somewhat  rough. 

10^^ — Slept  at  the  Boyal  Hotel,  and  at  6.30  this  morning 
started  on  horseback  for  Simlah,  and  arrived  at  this  place, 
Harripore,  which  is  better  than  half  way,  at  2  p.m.,  and 
have  put  up  for  the  night  at  the  dak-bungalow.  Harri- 
pore is  a  village  among  the  hills,  and  is  about  3800  feet 
above  the  sea.  The  ascent  begins  immediately  on  leaving 
Ealka,  and  is  continuous  all  the  way  to  Eassowlie,  a  town  of 
sotne  importance,  but  which  I  was  not  permitted  to  pass 


KASSO  WLIE^HARRIPORESIMLAH,         469 

through — cholera  heing  prevalent,  and  Kassowlie  in  quaran- 
tine ;  80  I  had  to  pass  round  it.  My  aneroid  shows  it  to  be 
6100  feet  above  sea-level.  The  road  was  once  good  all  the 
way,  but  the  unusually  heavy  rains  experienced  this  season 
have  damaged  it  seriously,  and  many  men  are  now  employed 
in  repairing  it  There  are  high  hills  everyv^here  round  about, 
green  to  the  summit,  but  no  timber  on  them,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  a  few  pines  near  to  Kassowlie.  Kassowlie  is  a 
military  station,  and  so  is  Sabatha,  some  miles  farther  on. 
The  barracks  at  this  latter  place  are  very  extensive,  and  are 
perched  on  the  summit  of  a  line  of  hills  of  considerable 
extent,  high  above  the  road  I  was  travelling.  The  hills 
round  about  Kassowlie  are  at  present  covered  with  soldiers* 
tents.  Leaving  Kassowlie,  the  road  passes  over  hill  and  dale, 
crosses  several  gorges,  two  of  them,  I  think,  on  suspension 
bridges,  and  leads  through  Harripore,  a  village  of  some 
importance,  and  then  on  to  this  bungalow.  There  is  culti- 
vation wherever  the  ground  will  permit,  the  crops  mostly 
maize  and  rice.  The  distance  from  Kalka  to  Simlah  is  about 
forty-six  miles,  sixty  by  the  cart-road. 

l^M,  Simlah. — It  took  me  five  and  a  half  hours  to  reach 
Simlah  from  Harripore  yesterday  morning.  The  road  is 
pretty  nearly  an  ascent  all  the  way.  This  road,  from  Kalka  to 
Simlah,  would  be  called  a  good  road  in  Kashmir,  but  it  is 
not,  in  great  part,  what  a  road  is  expected  to  be  in  British 
territory.  It  has  never  been  properly  constructed  to  begin 
with,  and  the  consequence  is,  that  it  gets  seriously  damaged 
every  wret  season,  and  then  costs  a  large  amount  of  labour  to 
repair  it.  This  ought  not  to  be,  for  if  once  efficiently  made,  the 
annual  expense  for  repairs  would  be  comparatively  trifling. 
One  of  the  highest  points  about  Simlah,  Jacob's  Hill,  is 
marked  on  the  map  8059  feet  high ;  and  another  point,  the 
Simlah  Magnetic  Observatory,  is  marked  7089  feet.  My  ane- 
roid makes  this  Royal  Hotel  to  be  7100  feet  above  sea-level. 
The  temperature  is  very  pleasant — 68"*  in  my  room. 

Yesterday  I  went  to  the  post-office,  and  requested  my 
letters  to  be  sent  to  the  Royal  Hotel.  This  morning,  when 
taking  a  walk  before  breakfast,  I  ran  against  the  postman 
carrying  two  bundles  of  letters.  He  asked  me  if  I  was  Mr 
C,    and    on    receiving    an    answer    in    the    affirmative,    he 


470  SIMLAH— CHURCH. 

there  and  then  squatted  down,  opened  one  of  his  bandies' 
and  without  looking  at  the  addreBB,  picked  oat  and  handed 
me  a  letter.  This  is  somewhat  analogous  to  the  post-office 
system  followed  in  villages  on  the  Nile,  where,  on  going  once 
to  post  a  letter,  I  found  the  office  represented  by  a  black 
fellow,  sitting  nnder  a  hedge,  a  good  half  mile  outside  the 
town.  How  the  native  postman  managed  this  morning  to 
pick  me  out  from  among  many  other  Europeans  who  were 
passing  by  at  the  time,  as  the  owner  of  the  letter  in  question, 
is  more  than  I  can  tell. 

Xbth. — Just  returned  from  church,  where  everything  wis 
'^  chanted.  The  thoughts  of  the  man  who  read  the  servioe 
were,  I  am  satisfied,  much  more  occupied  with  his  own 
manner  and  delivery  than  with  the  meaning  of  the  matter 
he  was  reading.  His  nimminy-pimminy  manner  possiblj 
might  have  been  appreciated  by  some  lovesick  damsel,  bat  to 
all  thinking  men  and  women  it  must  have  been  simply  abho^ 
rent,  so  thoroughly  unmanly  was  it  The  congregation  was 
fashionable,  numbering  perhaps  350  persons,  almost  as  manj 
women  as  men.  The  women,  without  exception,  came  to 
church  in  jampans,  although  the  temperature  was  deligfatfol 
for  walking. 

\^th, — A  gentleman  at  the  breakfast-table  told  a  story  this 
morning  which  might  bear  repeating,  illustrating,  as  it  does, 
a  point  in  the  character  of  the  natives  of  this  country.  He 
said,  as  he  was  coming  home  to  the  hotel  last  night,  his 
attention  was  attracted  by  a  sharp  altercation  going  on  in  the 
street  between  a  policeman  and  a  man  whom  he  had  just 
taken  in  charge.  Something  about  the  man  had  aroused  the 
suspicions  of  the  policeman,  and  he  had  stopped  him  and  had 
taken  a  jacket  from  him,  which  he  carried  on  his  arm.  The 
narrator  of  the  occurrence  remained  to  see  what  would  be  the 
result  of  the  altercation,  which  ended  by  the  policeman 
restoring  the  jacket  to  the  owner  and  setting  him  at  libertjr. 
During  the  altercation,  the  owner  of  the  jacket  had  loudly 
asserted  that  the  policeman  wanted  to  rob  him  of  his  jacket, 
in  the  pocket  of  which  there  were  five  rupees ;  so  when  the 
jacket  was  returned  to  him,  the  narrator  of  the  story  searched 
the  pocket,  but  found  no  money  in  it ;  and  on  demanding  to 
know  what  had  become  of  the  five  rupees,  the  owner  of  the 


SIMLAH—ART  UNION,  47  i 

jacket  admitted  that  there  never  had  been  five  rupees  in  the 
jacket-pocket,  and  that  he  had  merely  said  so  because  the 
policeman  had  falsely  stated  that  he  had  abused  him ;  so  that, 
to  pay  him  off,  he  had  invented  the  lie.  This  is  Eastern  all 
over. 

Yesterday  I  walked  up  to  Jacob's  Hill,  marked  on  the 
map  8059  feet  above  sea-leveL  My  aneroid  made  it  about 
7800  feet 

18^, — Walked  out  five  miles  to-day  to  look  at  a  spot  where, 
a  few  days  ago,  a  gentleman,  whilst  riding  along  a  mountain 
path,  had  been  forced  by  some  laden  mules  over  a  precipice 
at  least  two  hundred  feet  deep,  a  great  part  of  it  perpen- 
dicular rock.  Wonderful  to  relate,  he  had  no  limb  broken, 
and  the  extent  of  the  injury  he  suffered  was  a  slight  cut  on 
the  head.  The  shock,  however,  or  the  blows,  or  the  cut  on 
the  head,  produced  concussion  of  the  brain,  from  which  he 
soon  recovered.  The  horse  was  killed,  and  the  man  who  lent 
it  (for  it  was  a  borrowed  one),  thinks  he  ought  to  be  paid 
for  it 

The  cholera  seems  to  be  becoming  pretty  general  over 
India,  and  in  Eafihmir,  the  papers  state,  or  rather  the  papers 
state  that  in  Kashmir  (for  there  are  no  papers  in  Kashmir), 
that  of  5600  persons  who  had  been  attacked  up  to  our  latest 
dates  from  thence,  2900  had  died. 

%\st. — Opening  of  the  Art-Union  Exhibition  to-day  at  3.30, 
the  very  hour  at  which  I  am  writing,  and  it  is  raining  in 
torrents ;  so,  as  there  are  no  carriages  in  Simlah — all  locomo- 
tion is  either  on  foot  or  on  horseback  or  in  jampans — I  come 
to  the  conclusion  the  Governor-General,  Lord  Northbrook, 
will  have  very  few  witnesses  of  the  opening  ceremony. 

25^A. — ^Yesterday  I  visited  Annandale  Gardens,  situated  be- 
low Simlah  some  800  feet.  People  go  there,  I  believe,  to  picnic ; 
and  the  cricket-ground  is  close  to  the  gardens,  which  of  them- 
selves are  but  a  poor  affair.  I  found  there,  however,  what 
I  had  been  hunting  for  elsewhere  in  vain — some  last  year's 
deodar-seed,  and  bought  from  the  gardener  two  pounds,  for 
which  I  paid  him  two  rupees.  Yesterday  I  visited  the  Art- 
Union  Exhibition  of  pictures,  consisting  entirely  of  pictures 
by  amateurs,  some  400  of  them,  many  very  creditable  com- 
positions. 


472  KALKA—UMBALLAH. 

30M,  UmhaUah. — The  day  before  yesterday,  at  7  kjl.^  I 
bid  good-bye  to  Simlah  ;  the  day  before  that,  I  paid  a  visit 
to  Mr  B.  He  was  very  civil,  and  offered  to  introdaoe  me 
to  Lord  Northbrook,  an  honour  I  declined.  A  six  hours'  ride 
brought  me  to  Lowrie's  bungalow  at  Kuckkerhutty,  whoe  I 
dined  and  slept,  for  my  luggage  did  not  arrive  until  7  pjl 
This  bungalow  is  about  half  way  between  Simlah  and  Kalka, 
about  twenty-five  miles  from  both  places.  It  is  prettily 
situated  among  the  hills,  some  4000  feet  above  the  sea. 
Simlah  can  be  seen  from  it  very  distinctly.  A  mountaiQ, 
probably  10,000  feet  high,  was  pointed  out  to  me  as  producing 
large  quantities  of  honey,  the  bees  making  their  hives  among 
the  rocks  near  the  summit 

At  seven  yesterday  I  was  again  in  the  saddle,  and  reached 
Kalka  at  noon,  passing  through  Sabatha,  a  large  and  appar- 
ently a  very  favourite  station,  and  Kassowlie,  another  miUtaiy 
station  and  a  good-sized  town.  Kassowlie  must  be  6100  feet 
above  the  sea,  and  on  quitting  it  the  descent  to  Kalka  im- 
mediately commences.  The  distance  to  Kalka  is  about  ten 
miles,  and  the  descent  about  3000  feet  Here  I  put  up  at 
Mrs  M^Barnett's  Royal  Hotel,  and  slept  there  last  night,  for 
my  luggage  did  not  make  its  appearance  until  after  dark.  Left 
Kalka  at  seven  this  morning  in  a  dak-gharry,  for  which  I 
paid  sixteen  rupees,  and  at  1  p.il  reached  Umballah;  weather 
dry,  and  not  over  warm.  I  am  about  2000  feet  above  sea- 
level  here  at  Umballah,  if  my  aneroid  speaks  the  truth ;  and 
the  descent  from  Kalka  over  the  plain,  a  distance  of  thirty- 
eight  miles,  is  so  gradual,  that  no  one  would  ever  guess  it  to 
be  a  thousand  feet,  which  it  certainly  is. 

There  is  a  company  in  India  that  runs  dak-gharries  over 
some  of  the  roads,  and  it  is  opposed  by  the  Government  tooth 
and  nail.  At  Goojrat,  after  I  had  hired  a  gharry  from  the 
agent  of  the  company  to  take  me  to  Lahore  for  twenty  rupees, 
the  (Government  agent  came  to  the  bungalow  to  ask  if  I 
wanted  a  gharry  ;  the  fare,  he  said,  was  forty  rupees ;  and 
after  a  good  deal  of  talk,  and  on  my  telling  him  that  I  had 
hired  one  from  the  company  for  twenty  rupees,  he  offered  to 
take  twenty  also,  and  assured  me  that  the  company  had  no 
horses  fit  for  work,  and  that  they  would  be  obliged  to  em- 
ploy bullocks,  which,  of  course,  would  be  very  slow  work. 


UMBALLAH— DELHI.  473 

The  same  thing  took  place  here  at  Umballah  on  my  way  to 
Simlah.  Both  agents,  the  Government  agent  and  the  com- 
pany's agent,  came  together  to  the  hotel.  The  former  asked 
thirty  rupees  for  a  gharry  to  Ealka.  I  pitted  them  against 
each  other ;  and  when  at  last  the  agent  of  the  company  agreed 
to  give  me  a  gharry  for  twelve  rupees,  the  Government  agent 
said  he  too  would  give  me  one  for  twelve  also.  The  same 
thing  took  place  to-day  at  Ealka ;  the  Government  agent, 
after  asking  thirty  rupees,  came  down  to  eighteen,  and  I 
ultimately  hired  one  from  the  agent  of  the  company  for  six- 
teen rupees.  Now,  it  seems  to  me  that  this  conduct  on  the 
part  of  the  Government  is  disreputable,  and  m  place  of 
trying  to  crush  private  enterprise,  they  ought  to  encourage  it 
The  company  at  one  time  ran  gharries  between  Jehlum  and 
Peshawur,  but  the  Gt)vernment  obliged  them  to  abandon  that 
line  of  road,  and  the  Government  now  charges  a  rupee  a  mile 
between  those  two  places,  which  is  double  what  the  company 
could  afford  to  work  for.  When  I  went  from  Lahore  to  Murree, 
I  paid  at  the  post-ofSce  at  Lahore  seventy-one  rupees  for  a 
gharry,  and  I  found  out  afterwards  they  hired  one  at 
the  same  time  to  another  person,  who  threatened  to  take  one 
from  the  company,  for  forty  rupees !  Surely  such  conduct  as 
this  is  not  creditable  to  the  Government 

October  1«^,  Delhu — At  7.20  p.m.  yesterday  I  left  Umballah 
by  rail  for  Delhi,  and  arrived  at  my  destination  at  5.30  this 
morning.  This  is  very  slow  travelling,  120  miles  in  ten 
hours,  but  that  is  the  stereotyped  rate  on  the  Mooltan, 
Lahore,  and  Delhi  Railway.  On  arriving  at  the  railway 
station  at  Umballah,  I  took  possession  of  a  first-class  car- 
riage, into  which  I  put  all  my  luggage,  the  common  practice 
here,  although  by  the  company's  rules  you  are  not  allowed  to 
carry  a  single  pound  without  paying  for  it  Government 
employes  in  travelling  overrule  all  rules  in  this  country ;  and 
as  I  was  always  taken  by  the  half-caste  native  officials  at 
railway  stations  for  a  veteran  military  officer,  I  invariably 
followed  the  example  set  me  by  that  class,  and  deposited  my 
luggage  in  the  carriage  in  which  I  travelled  without  giving 
the  officials  the  trouble  of  weighing  it  Just  before  the  train 
started,  two  young  Englishmen  entered  my  carriage,  bringing 
with  them  a  large  amount  of  luggage  and  a  dozen  bottles 


474  TREATMENT  OF  THE  NATIVES. 

Boda-water.  These  two  youDg  fellows  bullied  the  coolies,  as 
is  their  wont  to  do,  carrying  matters  on  the  platfonn,  in 
treating  with  the  officials,  with  a  very  high  hand.  I  was 
glad  to  find  they  were  to  get  out  at  Salampore.  They  smoked 
and  pegged,  as  they  called  it,  the  whole  way,  and  finished 
the  soda-water  and  a  corresponding  quantity  of  brandy  before 
they  left  Now  there  was  nothing  in  the  weather  to  create 
thirst;  it  was  cool  and  pleasant,  and  still  they  drank  peg 
after  peg  of  brandy  and  soda,  as  if  drinking  was  an  absolute 
necessity  for  them.  Is  it  to  be  wondered  at  that  so  many  of 
these  yonng  fellows  lose  their  health  in  India  when  this 
pegging  is  carried  on  to  such  an  extent  as  it  is  ? — a  custom, 
too,  which  may  well  be  supposed  to  aggravate  their  treatment 
of  the  natives.  On  this  subject  I  had  a  conversation  the 
other  day  with  an  old  officer  of  a  hussar  regiment.  He  said 
they,  the  European  officers,  never  by  any  chance  associated 
with  the  native  officers ;  they  lived  entirely  apart,  and  the 
Europeans  knew  absolutely  nothing  of  the  inner  life  of  the 
native.  With  regard  to  the  conduct  of  the  youngsters  in  the 
European  regiments,  he  said,  no  doubt  when  they  first  arrived 
out  they  kicked  and  cuffed  their  native  servants,  but  thej 
soon  learnt,  if  they  continued  that  habit,  they,  in  the  end, 
would  be  the  sufferers,  for  their  servants  would  run  away 
from  them ;  and  once  an  officer  had  earned  a  bad  name  among 
servants,  he  found  great  difficulty  in  getting  a  servant  to 
engage  with  him. 

Very  few  of  these  young  fellows  ever  trouble  themselves  to 
learn  Hindostanee,  and  generally  in  the  regiments  everything 
native  is  positively  ignored,  and  with  this  feeling  ewrry  was 
an  unknown  dish  at  the  mess  of  his  regiment.  The  bulk  of 
the  European  travellers  to  the  hill-stations  are  army  officers, 
so  that  a  notice  which  is  stuck  up  at  a  dak-bungalow  on 
the  road  between  Simlah  and  Kalka  may  be  considered  as 
addressed  principally  to  them.  It  was  to  the  following 
effect.  Here  is  the  notice : — "  As  this  dak  is  maintained 
to  provide  comfortable  conveyances,  at  the  expense  of  much 
anxiety  and  trouble,  it  is  earnestly  solicited  that  the  servants 
may  not  be  maltreated,  and  that  gentlemen  will  not  insist 
against  the  terms  of  this  notice."  The  terms  alluded  to  are 
the  terms  upon  which  horses  could  be  hired.     Whilst  I  am 


GOVERNMENT  NOTICE.  .      475 

ipon  thiB  subject,  I  will  cite  a  portion  of  certain  riiles  laid 
lown  by  the  Government  of  the  Punjaub  for  the  guidance  of 
Tavellers  annually  visiting  Kashmir.  It  will  tend  to  show, 
>y  the  fact  of  such  being  necessary,  the  opinion  entertained 
It  headquarters  of  young  gentlemen  when  let  loose  in  Eash- 
nir. 

*' When  going  out  on  shooting  excursions,  visitors  are  to  take  carriages 
ind  supplies  with  them,  and  not  to  persist  in  demanding  them  at  places 
irhere  they  are  not  procurable. 

*'  Should  they  have  occasion  to  consider  that  they  or  their  followers 
have  been  ill  treated  or  affronted,  they  are  strictly  prohibited  from 
taking  the  law  into  their  own  hands  in  punishing  the  offending  parties, 
but  they  are  to  make  known  their  complaints  to  the  authorities  on  the 
ftpot,  and  immediately  to  report  the  matter  to  the  officer  on  deputation 
at  Sreenuggur. 

<' Officers  are  enjoined  to  remember  that  they  are  visitors  in  the 
remote  dominions  of  an  independent  sovereign,  where  they,  one  and 
all,  represent  thi  character  of  their  country  (?).  If,  on  any  occasion,  they 
or  their  servants  be  brought  into  contact  with  the  Maharajah,  his  son, 
relatives,  or  any  of  his  agents,  they  must  treat  them  with  respect  and 
courtesy  (!),  and  be  guided  by  and  conform  to  the  local  laws  and  usages. 

''  Officers  are  not  allowed  to  take  away  with  them,  either  in  their 
service  or  in  their  camps,  any  subjects  of  the  Maharajah  without  obtain- 
ing permission  and  a  passport  from  the  authorities. 

'*  They  are  strictly  required  to  settle  all  accounts  before  they  quit 
Kashmir,  and  to  be  responsible  that  the  debts  of  their  servants  are 
similarly  discharged. 

*'*'  Instances  having  been  brought  to  notice  of  European  visitors  to 
Kashmir  having  permitted  the  goods  of  native  merchants  to  be  mixed 
up  with  their  own,  with  the  object  of  evading  the  customs  duties 
leviable  thereupon  by  the  Kashmir  Oovemment,  it  is  hereby  pointed 
out  that  such  conduct  will  involve  legal  penalties ;  and,  in  case  of  per- 
sons in  the  civil  or  military  service  of  the  Queen,  will  be  reported  to 
the  supreme  Oovemment. 

**  The  Maharajah  occasionally  invites  European  visitors  to  entertain- 
ments, at  which,  if  the  invitation  be  accepted,  they  should  appear  in 
undress  uniform  or  evening  costume. 

'*  It  will  be  the  duty  of  the  officer  un  special  duty  to  report  to  the 
Punjaub  Oovemment  any  officer  or  traveller  infringing  any  of  these 
rules. 

"  Should  any  officer  be  guilty  of  any  aggravated  breach  of  decorum 
or  propriety,  or  of  violating  any  of  the  local  laws  or  usages  of  the 
country,  or  other  grave  misconduct,  the  civil  officer  on  special  duty 
at  Sreenuggur  is  empowered  to  call  upon  such  officer  to  quit  forthr 
with  the  territories  of  the  Maharajah.  Such  requisition  on  the  part 
of  the  civil  officer  must  be  promptly  complied  with.  An  appeal 
from  the  order  of  expulsion  will  he,  in  the  case  of  a  first  offence,  to  a 


476  TREATMENT  OF  THE  NATIVES. 

court  of  three  experienced  officers,  whom  the  civil  officer  ia  empowered 
to  summon  for  the  purpose  of  hearing  such  appeals,  and  the  dedsion 
of  these  officers  will  be  final  In  the  case  of  a  second  offence,  there 
will  be  no  appeal  against  the  order  of  the  civil  officer. 

"  T.  W.  Thorntok, 
Secretary  to  Governor  of  the  Punjavib. 

''  Note, — The  last  rule  b  issued  with  the  concurrence  of  their  Excel- 
lencies the  Viceroy  and  the  Commander-in-Chief." 

Is  it  not  to  be  feared  that,  before  Buch  stringent  rules  as 
the  foregoing  were  laid  down  by  the  Paiyanb  (Jovernment, 
the  necessity  for  them  had  become  very  patent  ? 

Travellers  in  India  constantly  find  themselves  mixed 
up  and  coming  into  contact  with  army  officers,  and  he  can- 
not but  be  struck  by  the  usual  tenor  of  their  conversatioD. 
Though  they  may  have  only  just  come  out  from  home,  their 
talk  discloses  clearly  enough  that  their  thoughts  run  upon 
how  they  are  to  get  upon  the  staff,  and  how  soon  they  will 
be  able  to  return  home.  These  are  the  subjects  that  seem  to 
occupy  their  whole  mind,  and  necessarily  prevent  them  from 
studying  their  professional  duties,  the  language  of  the 
country,  or  the  character  of  the  people  in  the  midst  of  whom 
they  are  but  units.  The  officers  of  the  old  Indian  army,  on 
the  contrary,  identified  themselves  with  the  country,  and  we 
saw  the  result  in  such  men  as  the  Laurences,  Nicholson,  . 
Havelock,  Hodgson,  and  many  others ;  and  it  may  be  mQch 
doubted  if,  at  the  commencement,  at  any  rate,  of  another  out- 
break (time  may  bring  such  to  the  surface),  their  like  will  be 
found  to  meet  the  emergency.  No  doubt  in  the  old  Company's 
time,  the  difficulties  in  the  way,  and  the  time  required  for  a 
trip  to  England  and  back,  operated  to  make  it  less  thought 
of  than  in  the  present  day ;  but  whatever  may  be  the  cause, 
it  is  much  to  be  regretted.  The  retaining  our  power  here 
depends  wholly  upon  our  army :  relax  your  grasp  for  a 
moment,  and  you  invite  a  mutiny.  The  Government  is  doing 
much  for  the  moral  and  material  advancement  of  the  people 
by  its  roads,  railways,  and  schools,  but  we  are  hated  by  them 
nevertheless,  and  I  take  the  reason  to  be,  first  of  all,  the 
colour  of  our  skin ;  and  next,  the  contemptuous  treatment 
dealt  out  to  them  by  young  officers  of  the  army,  and  by  the 
numerous  bands  of  half-educated  Englishmen  employed  on 
railways  and  public  works  generally ;  who,  from  the  fact  of 


TREATMENT  OF  THE  NATIVES,  477 

coming  into  constaDt  contact  with  the  masses  of  the  people, 
create  by  their  rough  treatment  a  feeling  of  intense  hatred, 
which  the  efforts  of  the  Government  towards  producing  con- 
tentment among  them  is  very  inadequate  to  surmount  No 
doubt  our  white  skins  are  very  much  against  our  ever  being 
beloved  by  these  people,  and  the  hatred  is  intensified  by  their 
knowing  that  we  have  great  contempt  for  them,  and  of  which 
we  never  lose  an  opportunity  to  remind  them.  Even  our 
very  children  born  in  India  are  indulged  in  the  pastime  of 
kicking,  biting,  and  scratching  their  nurses  and  attendants ; 
and  thus  from  their  very  cradle  they  commence  to  maltreat 
the  natives.  It  has  been  remarked,  that  there  is  no  class  of 
white  men  more  tyrannical  in  their  treatment  of  the  native 
than  those  who  have  been  born  in  the  country.  The  native 
lives  in  bodily  fear  of  us :  he  crouches  and  draws  himself 
along  in  the  dust  as  he  approaches  us,  and  at  the  same  time 
he  hates  us  with  all  his  heart  and  with  all  his  soul. 

Sdl — To-day,  accompanied  by  two  gentlemen  staying  in 
this  hotel,  I  drove  through  old  Delhi;  visited  the  tomb  of 
Sapter  Jung,  which  is  a  very  humble  imitation  of  the  Taj, 
and  the  observatory,  and  then  on  to  the  Kootub  Minar. 
"  This  wonderful  pillar  is  eleven  miles  from  Delhi :  it  had 
suffered  from  earthquakes  and  from  lightning,  but  in  1826 
the  Government  put  it  into  thorough  repair' at  a  cost  of 
£2000.  The  Minar  is  the  highest  pillar  in  the  world,  stand- 
ing 238  feet  above  the  level  of  the  ground.  The  diameter  of 
the  base  is  forty-seven  feet  two  inches,  and  of  the  apex  nearly 
nine  feet  The  plinth,  or  base,  is  two  feet  high,  the  shaft  is 
234  feet :  it  is  said  to  have  once  had  seven  stories,  and  to  have 
been  300  feet  high,  but  there  is  no  warrant  for  the  statement 
At  present  there  are  five  galleries,  including  the  one  at  the 
top.  In  the  lower  story  the  flats  are  alternately  angular  and 
circular;  in  the  second,  circular;  and  in  the  third,  angular  only. 
The  section  above  this  is  faced  with  marble,  having  a  belt  of 
dark  stone  at  the  bottom ;  and  the  upper  section  of  all  is  of 
red  sandstone,  of  which  the  whole  of  the  outside  of  the  pillar 
is  built,  having  two  belts  of  marble  and  some  ornamental 
marble-work  close  to  the  top.  The  history  of  the  Kootub  Minar 
is  written  in  its  inscriptions  encircling  the  tower.  The  upper 
band  consists  of  verses  from  the  Koran,  and  the  next  below 


478  THE  KOOTUB  MINAR, 

gives  the  well-known  ninety  names  (Arabic)  of  the  Almighty. 
The  third  belt  contains  the  name  and  praises  of  Maaz-ooden 
Abul  Mozafor  Mahomed  Bin  Sam.     The  fourth  belt  contains 
a  verse  from  the  Koran,  and  the  fifth  belt  contains  the  name 
of  the  Snltan  Mahomed  Bin  Sam.     The  lowermost  belt  has 
been  rendered  illegible  by  time  and  badly-execated  restora- 
tions ;  but  Sind  Ahmad  has  deciphered  the  words  Amir-ool 
Amrie,  or  chief  of  the  nobles.    The  inscription  over  the  door- 
way records  that  the  Minar  of  Saltan  Shnmsh-ooden  Altomsh, 
having  been  injured,  was  repaired  during  the  reign  of  Sekuada 
Shah,  son  of  Behlol,  by  Futch  Khan,  the  son  of  Khawas 
Khan,  in  a.h.  909,  or  a.d.  1503.     On  the  second  story  the 
inscription    over   the   doorway'  records    that   the    Emperor 
Altomsh  ordered  the  completion  of  the  Minar.     The  lowe^ 
most  belt  contains  the  verses  of  the  Koran  respecting  the 
summons  to  prayer  on  Friday,  and  the  upper  line  contains 
the  praises  of  the  Emperor  Altomsh.     Over  the  door  of  tiie 
third  story  the  praises  of  Altomsh  are  repeated,  and  again 
in  the  belt  of  inscriptions  round  the  column.      The  door  in- 
scription records  that  the  Minar  was  ordered  to  be  erected 
during  the  reign  of  Altomsh.     The  inscription  over  the  door 
of  the  fifth  story  states,  that  the  Minar  having  been  injured  bj 
lightning,  was  repaired  by  the  Emperor  Feroz  Shah  in  i-H. 
770,  or  A.D.  1368.    The  pillar  appears  to  have  been  completed 
about  A.D.  1235.    The  history  of  this  pillar  is  involved  in  great 
obscurity,  it  being  a  popular  legend  that  the  Hindu  Rajah 
Pithora  commenced  a  pillar  on  the  site  of  the  present  Minar, 
at  the  request  of  his  daughter,  who  was  desirous  of  seeing 
the  river   Jumna   daily,    and   from  its   summit   beholding 
the  rising  sun.     Whether  the  Hindu  Bajah  did  conmience 
the  building  can  never  be  satisfactorily  determined,  but  the 
glory  of  its  completion  undoubtedly  rests  with  the  Mahome- 
tans.     The   Kootub  Minar   is   charmingly  situated  among 
ruins  and  grass-lands  ;  379  steps,  in  excellent  repair,  built  of 
Kharra  stone,  lead  to  the  summit,  from  whence  there  is  a  mag- 
nificent view."    Extensive  view  would  have  been  more  correct 
You  see  the  city  of  Delhi  from  the  top  of  the  Minar,  but 
there   is    nothing   magnificent   in    that.      You    see   manj 
mud  villages,  and  perhaps  a  hundred  tombs  dotted  abont 
the  plain,   but   there    is    nothing    magnificent    either   in 


KOOTUB  MINAR-^MEHROWLIE.  479 

the  mnd  villages  or  the  half-ruined  tombs  that  meet 
your  gaze  from  the  Eootub.  There  is  a  good  deal  of 
caltivation  on  the  plain,  but  to  an  English  eye  it  is  very 
slovenly  work.  The  river  Jumna  is  seen  some  dozen  miles 
off,  a  very  sluggish  stream,  not  near  enough,  even  if  it  were 
a  rushing  torrent,  to  be  at  all  a  very  defined  object  in  the 
landscape. 

After  having  gone  to  the  top  of  the  Minar,  and  seen  what 
the  guide-book  calls  a  ^^magnificent  view,"  we  took  luncheon, 
and  then  drove  to  the  village  of  Mehrowlie,  where  there  is  a 
large  well  measuring  eighty  feet  from  the  brink  to  the  sur- 
face of  the  water.  I  dare  say  it  may  be  twenty -five  to  thirty 
feet  in  diameter  at  the  mouth.  There  is  a  class  of  divers  in 
the  village,  who  from  their  childhood  have  practised  diving 
down  into  this  well,  and  who,  for  four  annas  (6d.),  jump 
from  the  brink  down  into  the  water,  somewhat  over  eighty 
feet  At  first  their  legs  and  arms  are  spread  out,  but  closed 
into  the  body  just  before  reaching  the  water.  One  would 
•  suppose  they  cannot  go  down  very  deep  under  water,  for  they 
quickly  come  to  the  surface,  swim  to  the  side  of  the  well, 
and  run  up  the  steps  to  claim  the  four  annas.  Among  the 
divers  there  was  one  man  fully  seventy  years  of  age. 

3dl — From  Mehrowlie  we  drove  home  across  this  forty 
square  miles  of  lugubrious-looking  tombs  and  ruins  of 
tombs,  the  only  buildings  left  upon  these  plains ;  the 
dwellings  of  the  people  having  entirely  disappeared.  It  has 
been  often  remarked,  that  if  we  were  to  give  up  India 
to-morrow,  in  a  very  few  years  there  would  not  be  a  trace 
left  of  our  occupation.  Better  so,  say  I,  than  to  leave  behind 
us,  as  former  rulers  have  dune,  a  parcel  of  useless  tombs, 
which  serve  no  earthly  end.  Doubtless,  if  we  were  to  leave 
India  to-morrow,  the  roads  and  railroads  with  which  we 
have  intersected  the  country  would  in  fifty  years  (in  all 
probability)  have  entirely  disappeared;  and  it  is  for  this 
reason  that  we  should  not  be  warranted  in  giving  up  India 
now.  It  is  too  soon  to  think  of  this  yet ;  we  must  fit  the 
people  to  fully  appreciate  the  value  of  good  roads  and  rail- 
roads, and  teach  them  how  to  take  care  of  them  before  we 
think  of  foregoing  our  iron  grasp  of  the  country.  We  must, 
in  fact,  teach  them  how  to  govern  themselves  before  we 


48o  ASSA  ULT  OF  DELHL 

abandon  them.  There  is  not  one  Englishman  in  India  who 
does  not  know  very  well  that,  but  for  onr  military  organiaatioD, 
we  could  not  hold  India  for  a  week ;  nevertheless,  to  evacuate 
it  now  would  be  to  hand  it  over  to  anarchy  and  bloodshed, 
for  there  is  not  the  shadow  of  a  native  chief  that  we  know 
of  in  the  country  at  present  who  could  fill  our  place. 

4M. — This  morning  I  walked  over  the  ground  occupied  by 
our  troops  during  the  siege  of  Delhi  in  1857.  Near  the 
Kashmir  Gate,  the  wall  still  bears  the  marks  of  our  twenty- 
four-pound  shot,  though  the  gate  itself  has  been  repaired, 
as  well  as  the  wall,  somewhat  on  one  side  of  it,  in  which  a 
breach  was  made,  and  through  which  the  first  attacking 
column  under  General  Nicholson  entered.  We  had  hard 
work  to  Hold  our  own  after  we  had  got  into  the  city,  for  our 
whole  efiective  force  numbered  only  7000  men,  whilst  the 
mutinous  troops  in  Delhi  amounted  to  over  60,000.  We 
attacked  in  four  columns ;  the  first,  under  General  Nicholson 
entered  at  the  breach  made  at  the  Kashmir  bastion;  the 
second,  under  Colonel  Jones,  carried  the  breach  at  the  water 
bastion ;  the  third,  under  Colonel  Campbell,  entered  at  the 
Kashmir  Gate,  which  had  been  blown  open  by  Lieutenants 
Home*  and  Salkeld  of  the  engineers,  assisted  by  Sergeants 
Burgess  and  Carmichael,  and  Sergeant  Smith.  Three  ont 
of  the  five,  Salkeld,  Burgess,  and  Carmichael,  were  either 
shot  dead  or  fell  mortally  wounded.  The  assault  was  made 
on  14th  September^  and  it  was  not  until  the  20th  that  the 
whole  of  the  city  was  in  our  possession.  One  may  judge  of 
the  severity  of  the  fighting  when,  on  the  14th,  the  day  of 
the  assault,  sixty-six  officers  and  1104  men  were  counted 
among  dead  and  wounded. 

The  iron  pillar  t  close  to  the  Kootub  Minar,  (General  Cun- 
ningham says,  ^^is  one  of  the  most  curious  monuments  in 
India.  It  is  a  solid  shaft  of  mixed  metal,  upwards  of  six- 
teen inches  in  diameter,  and  about  fifty  feet  in  length.  The 
total  height  of  the  pillar  above  ground  is  twenty-two  feet. 
Its  depth  into  the  ground  is  considerably  greater  than  its 
height  above  ground,  as  a  recent  excavation  was  carried 

*  In  the  guide-book  by  Captain  Harcourt,  AaBiBtant-oommiasioner,  Delliii  ii« 
U  called  Home,  quoting  Lieutenant  Medley's  narrHtive  of  the  siege ;  but  oo  Ui« 
uiemorial  pillar  erected  on  the  ridge,  the  name  of  Jones  is  given. 

t  There  is  a  description  of  this  in  the  First  Tour,  which  see. 


KOOTUB  MINAR.  4S1 

down  to  twenty-six  feet  without  reaching  the  foundation  on 
which  the  pillar  rests."    Now,  on   my  recent  visit  to  old 
Delhi,  I  had  with  me  a  very  intelligent  native,  and  he,  as 
well  as  the  Brahmin  who  has  charge  of  the  Kootub  Minar, 
the  iron  pillar,  and  the  other  buildings  and  ruins  in  the 
immediate  neighbourhood,  told  me  that  last  year,  when  the 
camp  of  exercise  was  held  at  Delhi,  General  M^Murdo  had 
an  excavation  made  at  the  foot  of  the  pillar,  and  they  found 
that  it  was  only  five  and  a  half  feet  beneath  the  surface  of  the 
ground,  and  that  it  was  supported  and  kept  in  its  place  by 
iron  stays  some  five  feet  in  length.    Both  these  men  witnessed 
the  making  of  the  excavation.     The  appearance  of  the  flags, 
and  the  ground  all  around  the  base  of  the  pillar,  bear  evi- 
dence of  a  very  recent  excavation  having  been  made  there. 
The  pillar  was  probably  erected  by  Rajah  Dharah  in  a.d. 
319,  this  sovereign's  name  being  imprinted  on  it.     There  is 
a  legend  attached  to  it.     It  is  this :  that  '^  Rajah  Pithora, 
the  last  of  the  Hindoo  sovereigns,  dreading  the  fall  of  his 
dynasty,  consulted  the  Brahmins  as  to  what  steps  should  be 
taken  to  insure  its  continuance ;  he  was  informed  that  if  he 
sunk  an  iron  shaft  into  the  ground,  and  managed  to  pierce 
the  head  of  the  snake-god  Lishay,  who  supported  the  world, 
his  kingdom  would  endure  for  ever.     The  pillar  was  accord- 
ingly  constructed,    and    the    directions    of    the   Brahmins 
religiously  obeyed.      How  long  the  shaft  remained  undis- 
turbed is   not  said,  but  the  Rajah,  either  distrusting  his 
priestly  advisers,  or  desirous  of  seeing  for  himself  whether 
the  snake  had  been  touched,  contrary  to  the  entreaties  of  the 
Brahmins,  had  the  pillar  taken  up.     To  the  surprise  of  the 
spectators  and  the  consternation  of  the  sovereign,  the  end  of 
it  was  found  covered  with  blood,  and  the  Rajah  was  informed 
that  his  dynasty  would  shortly  cease.     He  ordered  the  pillar 
to  be  again  inserted  in  the  ground ;  but  the  serpent  below 
appears  to  have  had  enough  of  cold  iron,  and  the  Brahmins 
declared  that  the  sceptre  would  soon  pass  away  from  the 
Hindoo  sovereign.      The    charm   was    anyhow  broken,  for 
Shahab  Oodeen  shortly  after  wrested  from  Pithora  his  life 
and  his  kingdom,  and   from   that  day  to  this  no  Hindoo 
king  has  ever  ruled  in  Delhi." 
^th. — This  morning  I  drove  over  old  Delhi  for  a  distance 

2  u 


482  ENVIRONS  OF  DELHI. 

of  about  five  miles,  visiting  several  tombs,  some  of  them  en- 
tirely of  marble  and  of  exquisite  workmanship.  Among  others, 
I  went  over  the  Emperor  Humayon's  tomb,  from  which 
Hodgson  unearthed  the  Emperor  of  Delhi  and  his  two  bods 
after  the  siege.  The  size  of  the  tomb  may  be  imagined  by 
the  fact,  that  besides  the  Emperor  and  his  two  sons,  it  gave 
shelter  to  some  seven  or  eight  thousand  of  their  followers. 
The  dome  is  entirely  of  white  marble,  the  rest  of  the  build- 
ing being  of  red  sandstone,  with  inlaid  ornaments  of  white 
marble. 

The  whole  forty  square  miles  are  thickly  covered  with 
tombs  and  ruins  of  tombs,  forts,  and  palaces,  and  now  and 
then  villages  of  recent  construction  are  found  hidden  amoog 
the  ruins.  The  ancient  buildings  appear  all  to  have  been  of 
stone,  the  tombs  principally  of  sandstone. 

Feroz  Shah's  l&t,  or  pillar,  stands  just  outside  the  Delhi 
Gate ;  its  total  height  is  forty-two  feet  about,  and  the  sunken 
portion  only  about  four  feet  It  is  a  circular  column  of 
granite  of  one  piece,  erected  by  Asoka  about  270  years  before 
Christ.  The  inscriptions  on  it  are  in  Pali,  or  spoken  lan- 
guage of  that  day,  and  the  alphabetical  character  is  of  the 
oldest  form  that  has  yet  been  found  in  India.  Baoli,  or  the 
well,  is  close  to  Nizam  Oodeen's  tomb,  and  is  supposed  to 
have  been  commenced  in  1321.  There  are  numbers  of  boys 
and  men  here  who  do  nothing  else  but  dive  into  this  well 
from  the  roofs  of  the  surrounding  buildings.  The  height  thej 
jump  may  be  about  seventy  feet,  and  the  fee  four  annas. 

Sth, — I  have  had  several  long  walks  about  Delhi;  it 
is  rather  a  fine  city.  The  iron  railway  over  the  Jumna  is 
a  noble  structure ;  the  trains  pass  along  on  the  top,  whilst 
uuderneath,  as  at  the  bridge  over  the  St  Lawrence,  near  the 
falls,  there  is  a  good  carriage-way  of  about  twelve  feet  wide 
and  somewhat  more  than  that  high.  Most  of  the  carrying 
work  about  here  is  done  by  large  white  oxen  in  carts,  and  on 
the  backs  of  buffaloes.  The  white  bullocks,  too,  are  employed 
very  generally  for  drawing  travelling  and  city  carriages  of 
various  sorts  ;  many  of  them  go  at  a  good  pace.  Ordinary 
bullocks  are  worth  about  thirty  rupees  each,  but  a  pair  of 
large  handsome  fast  bullocks  for  a  carriage  sometimes  sell 
for  a  thousand  rupees.    Birds  and  the  smaller  kinds  of  aninaak 


DELHI.  483 

lead  a  good  life  in  India  ;  no  one  ever  molests  them  ;  and  so 
it  is  that  Delhi  is  full  of  them,  and  they  are  very  tame.  Wild 
pigeons,  doves,  and  squirrels  are  numerous,  and  unless  it  be 
in  a  few  business  streets,  every  house  in  Delhi  has  a  com- 
pound attached  to  it,  well-stocked  with  hd^e  trees,  giving 
shelter  to  all  these  little  animals  and  birds. 

In  the  Punjaub  the  women  really  wear  the  breeches ; 
the  men  wear  only  a  long  shirt,  that  is,  when  they  wear  any- 
thing ;  but  the  women  wear  pantaloons,  made  generally  to 
fit  very  tight  They  are  of  various  colours,  but  white  prevails. 
They  are  a  fine  race  of  men  in  this  part  of  India,  very  differ- 
ent firom  the  slim  Bengalee ;  but  there  is  more  or  less  here, 
as  everywhere  else  in  India,  the  same  crouching  before  the 
European.  If  there  are  men  seated  by  the  side  of  the  road, 
and  a  European  passes  by,  they  all  rise.  Even  well-dressed 
natives  on  horseback,  with  somewhat  of  a  retinue,  will  make 
a  salaam  to  an  Englishman  passing  on  foot ;  but  it  is  fear,  not 
love  or  respect,  that  prompts  it  It  is  true  the  law  does  what  it 
can  to  protect  the  native  from  ill-treatment,  and  an  English- 
man may  be  fined  fifty  rupees  for  beating  a  native  ;  but  it  is 
seldom  the  native  complains,  however  much  he  may  be  beaten : 
he  would  become  a  marked  man  were  he  to  do  so,  and  would 
in  vain  seek  employment  with  Englishmen  afterwards.  The 
natives  know  this  very  well,  and  therefore  it  is  that  an  Eng- 
lishman is  seldom  pulled  up  by  them,  although  there  is  a 
certain  class  of  Englishmen  in  India  who  seldom  use  any 
other  argument  than  the  fist  with  a  native.  As  I  go  along 
the  street,  I  often  feel  ashamed  to  receive  the  crouching  sub- 
servience which  is  dealt  out  to  me  by  almost  every  native  I 
meet  Not  that  they  know  who  or  what  I  am  ;  it  is  simply 
all-su£Scient  that  I  am  one  of  the  governing  race.  I  often 
think  it  would  do  many  of  our  Indian  countrymen  a  world 
of  good  to  pass  a  month  or  two  occasionally  in  such  a  place 
as  Melbourne,  where  they  would  be  constantly  in  contact  with 
some  of  the  finest  specimens  of  English  bone  and  sinew, 
walking  the  streets  with  an  air  of  thorough  independence. 
No  cringing  there — every  man  stands  upon  his  rights  ;  and 
yet  a  more  orderly  or  better  behaved  set  of  men,  whether  in 
the  streets  or  gathered  together  in  places  of  amusement,  I 
have  never  seen. 


484  MUSE  UM  A  T  DELHI. 

1  \tk — Paid  a  visit  this  morning  to  .the  mnseum.  It  con- 
tains a  few  Chinese,  Japanese,  and  Indian  trinkets ;  a  few 
specimens  of  shawls  manufactared  in  Kashmir  and  in  Delhi ; 
two  chairs  which  belonged  to  the  King  of  Delhi — and  good 
roomy  chairs  th§y  are,  evidently  made  for  a  man  who  was 
accustomed  not  to  sit  on  them  as  Europeans  sit,  but  to  squat 
on  them  as  the  Easterns  do,  with  their  legs  drawn  np  under 
them.  There  are  some  specimens  of  pottery,  chinaware,  and 
glass.  There  are  two  Buddhist  praying-machines — a  cylinder 
two  inches  in  diameter  and  three  inches  long,  filled  with 
prayers,  and  a  stick  running  through  the  centre  of  the  cylinder 
on  which  it  revolves,  the  stick  being  long  enough  for  a  man 
to  grasp  the  lower  end  of  it  in  his  hand  ;  then,  fastened  to  the 
centre  of  the  cylinder,  is  a  couple  of  inches  of  small  chain  with 
a  bit  of  iron  at  the  end  of  it,  which  helps  to  keep  the  cylinder 
in  motion  when  once  set  agoing  by  the  person  holding  in  bis 
hand  the  lower  end  of  the  stick  whirling  it  round.  There  are 
half-a-dozen  alligators,  crocodiles,  and  some  stuffed  fish;  some 
bird-skins  not  set  up,  and  very  much  moth-eaten ;  and  a  few  of 
the  smaller  animals  stuffed,  and  in  a  wretched  state  of  decom- 
position ;  a  few  swords  and  other  native  arms;  some  skulls  and 
bones,  and  the  portraits  of  the  two  Laurences,  Lord  Canning, 
Lake,  Lord  Elgin,  Hamilton,  General  Nicholson,  and  one  or 
two  other  Indian  celebrities;  a  profusion  of  armlets,  anklets, 
and  nose-riugs  ;  sketches  pretending  to  portray  the  outlines  of 
the  different  races  that  people  the  world,  but  they  are  without 
exception  wretched  caricatures,  tracings  beginning  with  the 
tadpole  and  ending  with  a  human  head ;  a  very  small  collection 
of  minerals  and  stones ;  two  or  three  pieces  of  elastic  sand- 
stone ;  a  few  snakes  and  scorpions,  and  crabs  and  other  fish 
in  spirits ;  the  skeleton  of  a  small  boa-constrictor.  Voxh 
touti  The  pictures  are  hung  against  the  vtralls,  the  other 
articles  are  placed  on  tables  and  on  the  floor  of  the  apartment, 
for  the  most  part  an  indiscriminate  mixture.  Very  few  of 
the  specimens  are  protected  by  glass.  For  a  large  city  like 
Delhi,  it  is  a  miserable  collection.  I  saw  no  catalogue,  but 
as  a  few  of  the  articles  are  numbered,  I  suppose  there  may 
once  have  been  one ;  and  a  few  of  them  have  written  upon 
them  what  they  are  and  where  they  come  from.  There  is, 
too,  a  small  peacock,  very  much  mutilated,  possibly  of  silver, 


DELHI— AGRA.  485 

taken  from  the  peacock  throne  of  the  ancient  kings  of  Delhi. 
If  these  European  Indians  could  only  see  the  collections 
gathered  together  by  the  trading  people,  looked  upon  with 
so  much  indifference  by  them,  of  New  Zealand,  New  South 
Wales,  and  Victoria,  beautifully  arranged,  described,  and 
protected,  it  might  put  them  to  the  blush.  The  museum  at 
Victoria  might  be  envied  by  many  a  large  European  city. 

The  Queen's  Garden  occupies,  perhaps,  about  fifty  acres, 
nicely  laid  out,  an  abundance  of  frees  in  it  large  enough  to 
afford  a  fair  amount  of  shade,  and  many  flowering  shrubs. 
Roses  and  convolvuluses  very  plentiful,  walks  and  drives  fairly 
kept.  A  canal  passes  through  the  garden,  from  which,  of 
course,  an  unlimited  supply  of  water  is  obtained,  which 
keeps  the  plots  of  grass  green  and  pleasing  to  look  at  all  the 
year  round.  There  is  a  limited  menagerie  in  the  garden,  in 
which  are  to  be  seen  several  royal  tigers,  old  and  young; 
leopards,  black  bears,  monkeys,  and  a  few  deer,  all  looking 
very  healthy,  particularly  the  tigers.  There  are  a  few  birds 
also,  and  among  them  some  amusingly  talkative  minar  birds, 
so  common  throughout  all  India.  There  is  a  stone  elephant, 
too,  with  a  long  history  attached  to  it,  found  a  few  years  ago 
in  a  "  thousand  pieces,"  and  set  up  by  the  municipality  of 
Delhi  where  it  now  stands,  the  only  elephant  in  the  mena- 
gerie. The  garden  is  full  of  birds ;  they  are  there  in  thou- 
sands, principally  pigeons  and  doves,  so  tame  that  they  don't 
care  to  move  out  of  your  way.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the 
pretty  little  striped  squirrels ;  they  abound  here,  and  neither 
birds  nor  squirrels  are  even  meddled  with. 

16M,  Agra. — I  came  here  this  morning  from  Delhi  by 
a  train  that  left  at  6  p.m.  yesterday,  and  arrived  at  the 
Agra  station  at  2.30  this  morning,  and  from  the  station  I 
was  a  good  forty  minutes  reaching  the  hotel,  **  Beaumont's 
North- Western  Hotel."  The  station  is  on  one  side  of  the 
Jumna,  and  the  town  and  cantonments  on  the  other,  which  is 
awkward ;  and,  to  make  it  more  unpleasant,  there  is  a  toll  of 
twelve  annas  to  pay  on  crossing  the  bridge.  A  railway  bridge, 
however,  is  being  constructed,  and  may  be  finished  in  a  yeai* 
or  two.  Many  railways  are  now  being  constructed  by  the 
Grovernment,  all  narrow  gauge,  one  metre  (39j  inches),  the 
existing  railways  being  what  they  call  here  the  broad  gauge. 


486  THE  TAJ-- A  GRA—EAR  TH  MO  UNDS. 

After  tarning  in  for  an  hour,  I  got  up  and  drove  to  the 
Taj,  stopping  on  the  way  and  going  off  the  road  to  examine 
au  artificial  mound,  covering  about  six  acres,  whose  acquaint- 
ance I  first  made  in  1868.  The  highest  part  of  it  must  be 
some  fifty  or  sixty  feet  It  is  of  irregular  shape,  and  is 
strewed  all  over  with  bits  of  broken  bricks  and  pottery.  It 
is  stated  to  be  the  result  of  brick-burning.  Such  mounds 
are  numerous  all  over  India ;  at  Old  Delhi  there  are  many 
of  them.  Exteriorly  they  resemble  the  Jericho  mounds.  On 
the  edge  of.  this  mound  there  is  a  large  well,  very  ancient, 
with  a  mouth  some  twelve  feet  wide,  from  which  water  was, 
no  doubr,  procured  for  making  the  bricks.  The  mound  has 
never  been  dug  into ;  at  least,  there  is  now  no  appearance  of 
its  ever  having  been  dug  into.  The  Taj  I  have  described 
already,  so  far  as  my  brief  visit  in  1868  enabled  me  to  do. 
I  may  copy  here  the  interesting  description  of  it  given  by 
Mr  Taylor,  an  American,  who  visited  it  some  few  years  ago. 

^'  The  Taj  stands  on  the  banks  of  the  Jumna,  rather  more 
than  a  mile  eastward  of  the  fort  of  Agra ;  it  is  approached 
by  a  good  road,  cut  through  mounds,  the  debris  of  ancient 
palaces.     Like   the  tomb  of  Akbar,  it   stands   in  a  large 
garden,  enclosed  by  a  lofty  wall  of  red  sandstone,  with  arched 
galleries  around  the  interior,  and  entered  by  a  superb  gate- 
way of  sandstone  inlaid  with  white  marble   covered  with 
inscriptions  from  the  Koran.     Outside  of  this  grand  portal, 
however,  is  a  spacious  quadrangle  of  solid  masonry,  with  an 
elegant  structure  intended  for  a  caravansery.    Whatever  might 
be  the  visitor's  impatience,  he  cannot  help  pausing  to  notice 
the  fine  proportions  and  the  rich  and  massive  style  of  this 
building.     The  gate  leading  into  the  garden  of  the  Taj  is  not 
so  large  as  that  at  Akbar's  tomb,  but  quite  as  beautiful  in 
design.    Passing  under  the  open  demivault,  whose  arch  hangs 
high  above  you,  an  avenue  of  dark  Italian  cypress  appears 
before  you ;  down  its  centre  sparkles  a  long  row  of  fountaiDS, 
casting  up  a  single  slender  jet ;  on  both  sides  the  palm,  the 
banyan,  and  the  feathery  bamboo  mingle  their  foliage;  the 
song  of  birds  meets  your  ears,  and  the  odour  of  roses  and 
lemon-flowers  sweetens  the  air ;  down  such  a  vista  and  over 
IMh  a  foreground  rises  the  Taj. 

It  10  an  ootairaiial  building,  or  rather  a  square  with  the 


THE  TAJ,  487 

comers  truncatedy  and  each  side  precisely  similar.  It  stands 
npon  a  lofty  platform,  with  a  miDaret  at  each  comer,  and 
this  again  is  lifted  on  a  vast  terrace  of  solid  masonry.  An 
oriental  dome,  swelling  out  into  nearly  two>thirds  of  a  sphere, 
and  tapering  at  the  top  into  a  crescent-tipped  spire,  crowns 
the  edifice,  rising  from  its  centre,  with  four  similar,  but  much 
smaller,  domes  at  the  corners.  On  each  side  there  is  a  grand 
entrance,  formed  by  a  single-pointed  arch,  rising  nearly  to 
the  cornice,  and  two  smaller  arches,  placed  one  above  the 
other  on  either  hand.  But  no  words  can  convey  an  idea  of 
the  harmony  of  the  different  parts  of  the  grand  and  glorious 
effect  of  the  whole  structure,  with  the  attendant  minarets. 
The  material  is  the  purest  white  marble,  little  inferior  to  that 
of  Carrara :  it  shines  so  dazzlingly  in  the  sun,  that  you  can 
scarcely  look  at  it  near  at  hand,  except  in  the  morning  and 
evening.  Every  part  of  it,  even  the  basement,  the  dome, 
and  the  upper  galleries  of  the  minarets,  are  inlaid  with  orna- 
mental designs  in  marble  of  different  colours,  principally  a 
pale  brown  and  a  blueish-violet  variety.  Great  as  the 
dimensions  of  the  Taj  are,  it  is  as  laboriously  finished  as  one 
of  those  Chinese  caskets  of  ivory  and  ebony  which  are  now  so 
common  in  Europe.  Bishop  Heber  truly  said,  ^  The  Pathans 
designed  like  Titans,  and  finished  like  jewellers.'  Around  all 
the  arches  of  the  windows  and  the  portals,  around  the  cornice  and 
the  domes,  on  the  walls  and  in  the  passages,  are  inlaid  chapters 
of  the  Koran,  the  letters  being  exquisitely  formed  of  black 
marble.  It  is  asserted  that  the  whole  of  the  Koran  is  thus 
inlaid  in  the  Taj,  and  I  can  readily  believe  it  to  be  true.  The 
building  is  perfect  in  all  its  parts  ;  any  dilapidations  it  may 
have  suffered  have  been  so  well  restored,  that,  all  traces  of 
them  have  disappeared.  I  ascended  to  the  base  of  the 
building,  a  gleaming  marble  platform,  almost  on  a  level  with 
the  tops  of  the  trees  in  the  garden.  Before  entering  the  cen- 
tral hall,  I  descended  to  the  basement,  where  is  the  vault 
containing  the  ashes  of  the  beautiful  Noorjehan.  A  sloping 
passage,  whose  walls  and  floors  have  been  so  polished  by  the 
hands  and  feet  of  thousands,  that  you  must  walk  carefully  to 
avoid  sliding  down,  conducts  to  a  spacious  vaulted  chamber. 
There  is  no  light  but  what  enters  at  the  door,  and  this  falls 
directly  upon  the  tomb  of  the  queen ;  in  the  centre.  Shah 


48S  AGRA  TO  BOMBAY, 

jehan,  whose  ashes  are  covered  by  a  similar  cenotaph,  raised 
somewhat  above  hers,  sleeps  by  her  side.  The  vault  was 
filled  with  the  odonr  of  rose,  jasmin,  and  sandal-wood,  the 
precious  attars  of  which  are  sprinkled  upon  the  tombs. 
Wreaths  of  beautiful  flowers  lay  on  the  tombs,  or  withered 
around  its  base.  These  were  the  true  tombs,  the  monuments 
for  display  being  placed  in  the  grand  hall,  above  which  is  a 
lofty  rotunda,  lighted  both  from  above  and  below  by  screens  of 
marble  and  jasper,  and  ornamented  with  a  wainscoting  of 
sculptured  tablets  representing  flowers.  The  tombs  are 
sarcophagi  of  the  purest  marble,  exquisitely  inlaid  with 
bloodstone,  agate,  cornelian,  lapislazuli,  and  other  precious 
stones,  and  surrounded  with  an  octagonal  screen  six  feet 
high,  in  the  open  tracery  of  which  lilies,  irises,  and  other 
flowers  are  interwrought  with  the  most  intricate  ornamental 
designs.     It  is  of  marble,  covered  with  precious  stones." 

2Qthy  Bombay. — I  was  in  the  train  at  Agra  at  midnight  on 
the  17th,  and  I  arrived  here  yesterday  at  11.45  a.m.    The  dis- 
tance is  1106  miles.     From  Allahabad  to  Bombay  we  travelled 
at  the  rate  of  twenty-four  and  a  half  miles  an  hour,  including 
stoppages,  the  train  frequently  going  along  at  the  rate  of 
'  forty  miles.     About  100  miles  before  we  reached  Bombay 
we  came  to    the  Thule  Ghaut,   which   is   ten   miles  long, 
with  a  gradient  of  one  in  thirty-seven.     It  is  a  noble  line 
this  from  Allahabad  to  Bombay — single  line  of  rail  princi- 
pally, steel  rails  on  the  Thule  Ghaut.     Some  curiously-oat- 
lined  hills,  sandstone  doubtless,  are  passed  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  ghaut,  representing  towers,  and  steeples,  and 
other   fantastic   shapes,    produced    by  the  action  of  water 
washing  away  the    softer  parts.     I  am   at  the  Esplanade 
Hotel   (Watson's),   a  large   new  and   dear  hotel,  eight  to 
twelve  rupees  per  day.     Thermometer  at  noon  in  the  train, 
Wf^  and  at  daylight,  l(f.     At  the  refreshment-room  at  Alla- 
habad, a  respectably-dressed  Englishman,  keeping  up  the 
character  we  have  gained  for  ourselves  in  this  country  among 
the  natives,  sat  down  to  dinner  beastly  drunk,  and  for  a  con- 
siderable time  resisted  all  efforts  that  were  made  to  remo?e 
him.     In  the  end  he  was  led  away  to  the  waiting-room, 
where  he  lay  down  on  a  wide  wooden  sofa,  and  finished  by  fall- 
ing off  on  to  the  floor.     When  last  I  saw  him,  he  was  in  the 


AGRA  TO  BOMBAY,  489 

Lands  of  four  coolies^  one  to  each  hand  and  each  leg,  and 
being  carried  away  a  dead-drunk  corpse.  This  sort  of  thing 
is  not  nncommon  in  India,  and  no  traveller  can  be  many  days 
on  a  railway  line  without  witnessing  a  somewhat  similar 
exhibition.  In  Kashttiir,  even,  drinking  among  our  country- 
men was  very  common.  AH  day  long  pegging,  as  they  call 
it — that  is,  drinking  brandy  and  soda — was  going  on,  and  fre- 
quently to  great  excess.  I  was  told  of  one  man  who  was 
constantly  drunk  at  Sreenuggur,  and  in  one  of  his  bouts 
tumbled  out  of  his  bungalow  window. 

When  I  was  coming  from  Lahore  to  Delhi,  two  of  my 
countrymen  got  into  the  same  carriage  with  me,  bringing  with 
them  a  number  of  bottles  of  soda-water  with  brandy  to  corre- 
spond ;  and  during  the  time  they  remained  with  me  they  took 
a  peg  every  quarter  of  an  hour;  but  this  circumstance  I  have, 
I  believe,  already  chronicled  somewhere  else  in  my  journal. 
The  amount  of  drinking,  in  fact,  that  goes  on  in  this  country 
among  our  countrymen  is  incredible,  and  of  course  is  very 
destructive  to  health,  and  to  good  manners  also.  I  was  alone 
in  a  carriage  between  Jubblepore  and  Bombay,  when,  at  a 
roadside  station,  a  native  got  in.  It  is  somewhat  unusual, 
I  believe,  to  find  natives  travelling  in  first-class  carriages,  and 
this  man  took  his  seat  in  a  corner,  in  a  way  that  showed 
he  did  not  consider  himself  a  very  palatable  companion  for 
me.  I  was,  however,  glad  to  have  him,  so  I  commenced  at 
once  to  set  him  at  his  ease  and  to  draw  him  out.  He  was,  he 
told  me,  a  medical  man  living  at  Harda,  a  little  place  forty 
miles  from  where  he  got  in ;  he  had  been  up  the  line  to  see 
a  sick  friend,  and  was  now  returning  home.  He  had  studied, 
he  told  me,,  and  passed  his  examination  at  the  Medical 
College  at  Calcutta;  he  was  a  Bengali  and  a  Hindoo.  I 
probed  him  on  the  subject  of  religion,  upon  which  he  talked 
shrewdly,  and  at  last  very  excitedly.  To  my  question  whether 
he  thought  the  missionaries  did  much  good  in  India,  he  said 
yes  ;  by  establishing  schools  and  encouraging  education,  there 
was  no  doubt  they  did  considerable  good.  I  asked  him 
whether  or  not  they  made  many  conversions  from  Hindooism ; 
yes,  he  said,  many  even  among  the  best-educated  Brahmins, 
of  whom,  he  thought,  no  doubt  many  became  Christians  in 
order  to  escape  the  performance  of  the  very  arduous  duties 


490  A  NATIVE  DOCTOR. 

imposed  upon  tbem  by  Hindooism,  and  also  that  they  migbt 
acquire  the  right  to  eat  meat  I    No  member  quitting  Hiudooism 
was  ever  permitted  to  return  to  it,  but  a  Mussulman  might 
turn  Christian  and  go  back  again  to  Mahometan  ism  simply  bj 
performing  a  small  penance.     Many  Hindoos,  he  said,  became 
Mussulmans,  but  no  Mussulman  would  be  permitted  to  become 
a  Hindoo.     The  religious  duties  of  the  Mussulman,  he  said, 
were  much  less  onerous  than  those  of  the  Hindoo,  and  heDoe 
the  reason  why  so  many  Hindoos  became  Mussuhnans.    He 
told  me  a  queer  story  of  a  fakir  who  lived  in  the  jungle 
country  through  which  our  trnin  was  then  passing.     A  fakir, 
he  said,  came  to  him  at  Harda  for  medical  treatment;  his 
hands  and  arms,  and  his  body  also,  were  covered  with  leprous- 
looking  blotches,  produced,  the  fakir  thought,  by  remainiog 
too  long  at  night-time  in  cold  water,  and  afterwards  taking 
large  does  of  arsenic  to  restore  the  circulation.     A  Hindoo 
must  always  wash  before  he  prays.     The  fakir,  a  very  holy 
man,  submitted  himself  to  the  doctor's  treatment,  and  in  a 
couple  or  three  days  the  blotches  disappeared.     The  doctor 
having  gained  the  confidence  of  the  fakir,  asked  him  how,  for 
the  most  part,  he  spent  his  life  in  the  jungle ;  the  fakir  re- 
plied that  for  many  years  he  had  been  studying  and  ^^  practis- 
ing suspended  animation ;"  and  there  and  then  he  proceeded 
to  show  the  doctor  how  he  accomplished  the  operatidki.    By 
long  practice,  he  said,  he  had  attained  the  power  of  suspended 
animation  in  so  far  as  the  lungs  and  heart  were  concerned,  of 
which  he  gave  the  doctor  practical  proof.     The  doctor  now 
proceeded  to  tell  me  how  he  himself  had  observed  what  could 
have  resulted  only  from  supernatural  powers.     In  travelling 
through  this  very  same  jungle  in  which  the  fakir  lived,  he 
had  seen  writing  in  Sanscrit  on  the  back  of  some  trees,  and 
he  was  told  that  it  was  the  writing  of  a  saint,  who,  in  pass- 
ing through  the  pathless  forest,  had  in  this  way  directed  the 
footsteps  of  his  followers.     At  first,  the  doctor  said,  he  be- 
lieved that  he  was  being  imposed  upon,  but  on  cutting  into 
the  trees,  he  found  that  the  writing  extended  quite  into  the 
heart,  proving  that  it  could  only  be  the  result  of  the  exercise  of 
miraculous  power.     In  this  way,  telling  me  stories,  the  doctor 
beguiled  time  as  we  travelled  along,  and  frequently  evinced 
by  his  observation  great  shrewdness  mixed  up  with  supersti- 


HINDOOISAL  49 1 

tioD,  common,  I  believe,  among  Eastern  people.  He  talked  of 
the  new  religion,  Deism,  which  had  been  not  very  long  started 
at  Calcatta,  and  was  making  headway  among  the  Hindoos 
more  or  less  generally  throughout  Bengal.  He  seemed  to 
think  the  motive  which  worked  with  converts  from  Hindooism 
to  Deism,  pure  and  simple,  was  that  the  new  belief  gave  them 
more  latitude  to  do  or  to  act  in  this  world  than  the  old  one, 
and,  in  fact,  they  believe  they  could  gain  heaven  on  easier 
terms  by  following  or  by  believing  in  Deism  than  by 
Hindooism.  This  my  friend  thought  was  the  secret  of  their 
conversion. 

The  hanging  nests  of  the  haylu  (weaver-bird)  are  in  great 
numbers  on  the  trees  bordering  this  railroad ;  they  are  very 
clever  birds,  it  is  clear,  or  they  could  never  manage  to  con- 
struct the  nests  they  do.  They  are  generally  in  clusters,  these 
nests,  many  of  them  hanging  from  the  branches  of  the  same 
tree,  usually  an  acacia.  The  doctor  told  me  that  these  little 
birds  could  be  taught  to  do  clever  tricks,  and  he  mentioned 
that  he  had  often  seen  in  their  nests  the  firefly,  fastened  on 
the  sides  with  a  little  mud,  carefully  done,  so  as  not  to  kill 
the  fly,  doubtless,  that  the  bird  in  the  nest  might  have  the 
benefit  of  the  fly's  bright  little  light.  If  this  be  true,  it  cer- 
tainly shows  wonderful  sagacity  on  the  part  of  the  little 
weaver-bird.  The  doctor,  however,  is  clearly  a  man  given  to 
romance,  and  therefore  the  story  of  the  little'  bird  and  the 
firefly,  and  some  of  the  doctor's  other  stories,  may  or  may  not 
be  worthy  of  credit 

When  at  Delhi,  I  met  at  the  hotel  one  of  the  leading 
barri8ter6,who  mentioned  a  circumstance  showing  the  tenacity, 
I  may  call  it,  of  the  Hindoos,  touching  caste  or  religious 
forms.  Mr  N.  had  just  lost  his  wife,  and  been  obliged  to 
take  a  Hindoo  woman  into  his  family  as  ayah.  This  cir- 
cumstance led  to  the  knowledge,  Mr  N.  said,  that  a  Hindoo 
woman  who  took  service  in  a  Christian  family  was  never 
permitted  to  return  to  her  husband's  bed,  and  to  the  rights 
of  her  religion,  whilst  living  with  Christians,  although  con- 
stantly visiting  her  home  and  her  husband ;  and  it  was  only 
after  leaving  service,  and  after  having  performed  a  certain 
amount  of  penance,  that  she  was  permitted  to  do  so. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

Bound  to  China   and  Japan— Oalle—Penang— John   Chinaman— The   fruit  thit 
tempted  Eve— The  Dutch  cultirate  tob«icco  and  nntmep  in  Somatra— Siasi- 

S»re— €rood  hotcd— Bajah  Brooke— Malayi  plnckj  policemen — ShelltyHoag 
ong— Canton  ;  river  alive  with  hoats— Honan  ;  lacred  pige — ^Bnddhiit  ud 
Catholic  prieata— Visit  old  and  new  cities— J'ade,  its  great  price— Tteit  for 
jade  in  New  Zealand— Archdeacon  Grey  preachee— Anther's  servant  a  oontert ; 
often  drunk— Depopulation  of  the  Sandwich  Islands— City  side  of  river— SI^ 
cution  ground— Water-clock — Sleeping  figure  of  Buddha— Opium  Adoon— Rioc- 
paper  painting— Mosque— Bows  and  arrows ;  instruction  by  a  Tartar— GardcBi 
—Duck  and  diicken  hatching;- Dwarfed  fruit-trees— Sedan-chairs -Great  esrt 
taken  of  ordure— Public  cabmets— Fortune-telling  shops — French  cathsdnl— 
Sharman,  residence  of  foreigners  —British  Consulate-— On  board  steamer  for 
Hong  Kong— How  live  fish  are  conveyed  by  steamer — Fiah  hatched  in  |M»d*— 
Hong  Kong  a  fine  town — Pigeon  English — ^The  Encliih  do  not  leam  Cbiiiest— 
Leave  for  Japan — Chan^  the  Giant,  his  historr — Voloano  of  Imoya— Tokohsms 
—Fusiyama— Leave  for  mterior— Hundreds  of  ginrickshas  drawn  Inr  one  maa— 
Beggars— Laden  ponies  with  straw  shoes— Tea-houses— Heaps  'of  childria— 
At&mi— Hot  Bulphur-baths-Temples— Period  of  transformation  in  Japan— 
lAke  Hakofti— ifoble  trees  of  onrptomeria— Temple  of  Shaognani— Forerti 
of  bamboo  and  long  grass— Ice— Boiling  springs— Earthquake— Paper-tree- 
Sir  R.  Alcock's  dog  Toby  —  Fusiyama  —  Hatta— Snow  —  Pass  of  Otoms- 
Tonge— Adawarra— Hot  mineral-springs- Fairy-like  scene— Buddhist  temple 
—Mineral  baths— Soil  volcanic— Daimio's  castle  in  ruins— Orange  grovee- 
Swashbucklers— The  everlasting  baby— Villages— Winnowing  com— Carried  ia 
ginrickshas— Fugisawa  —  BuddMst  temple— Coined  money  hoarded  —  Paper 
money — Return  to  Yokohama. 

23rf  October. — At  2  p.m.  to-day,  embarked  on  board  the 
Hj/daspes^  bound  for  Ceylon,  Penang,  Singapore,  Hong  Kong, 
and  Sliaughai,  taking  my  passage  only  as  far  as  Hong  Kong, 
for  which  I  paid  420  rupees.  It  was  five  o'clock  on  24th 
before  the  mails  came  on  board,  and  we  then  started.  A 
light  south  wind  has  been  blowing  ever  since  ;  water  smooth, 
weather  rather  cloudy.  Steaming  ten  and  a  half  knots ;  due 
at  Galle  on  26th.  Only  five  passengers,  but  doubtless  we 
shall  pick  up  some  more  from  the  English  boat  at  Galle. 
Distance  run,  243  miles. 

2x)th, — Very  calm  weather  up  to  last  night,  when  the  wind 
shifted  from  S.S.E.  to  N.N.W.,  bringing  rain  and  causing  a 
little  movement,  but  not  much. 

2QtlL — We  got  into  Galle  about  1  p.m.  on  26th.  Making 
the  passage  from  Bombay  in  four  days  less  four  hours.  Our 
ftvenige  speed  during  the  passage  was  a  trifle  over  ten  knots ; 


GALLE,  493 

distance  between  Bombaj'  and  Galle,  about  900  miles.  With 
the  exception  of  a  little  rain  on  the  night  of  24th,  the  weather 
otherwise  was  fine  the  whole  way,  and  the  water  smooth.  We 
foand  fonr  steamers  at  Galle  on  our  arrival  there,  and  two 
others  came  in  whilst  we  remained,  and  two  more  were  enter- 
ing the  port  as  we  came  out.  The  bulk  of  the  first-class 
passengers  per  Malacca  from  England,  and  some  others  from 
Calcutta  and  Bombay,  found  their  way  to  the  Oriental  Hotel, 
and  the  hubbub  in  the  verandah  caused  by  buyers  and  sellers 
of  Ceylon  wares,  quite  equalled  what  I  had  often  witnessed 
at  Shepherd's  Hotel,  Cairo,  on  the  simultaneous  arrival 
of  the  outward  and  homeward  passengers  by  the  P.  k  0. 
boats  at  Alexandria  and  Suez.  All  that,  however,  has  been 
done  away  with,  since  the  line  from  Suez  to  Alexandria 
no  longer  passes  by  or  through  Cairo,  but  goes  round  by 
Ismalia  and  Zagazig,  and  joins  the  main  line  at  Benah,  some 
twenty  miles  below  Cairo.  Thermometer  at  Galle  ranging 
between  80°  and  90°,  but  the  heat  not  at  all  oppressive. 

Z\st. — The  first  day  out  we  made  forty-four  miles  ;  yester- 
day 241,  and  up  to  noon  to-day,  257  miles.  Fine  weather 
with  a  long  beam-swell  coming  from  the  North  Pacific.  Our 
rate  of  steaming,  about  ten  knots.  Thermometer  ranging 
between  80**  and  90°,  generally  reaching  86°  in  my  cabin  in 
the  hottest  part  of  the  day.  This  craft  has  accommodation 
for  seventy-nine  passengers  in  the  saloon  cabins,  and  fifty  on 
the  main-deck  forward. 

Notemher  \sL — In  1867  the  railway  from  Colombo  to 
Kitudy  was  completed,  at  a  cost  of  about  £1 ,750,000.  Length 
about  seventy  miles. 

Schools  in  Ceylon,  1421,  with  47,068  scholars.  First 
census  taken  in  1871.  Railway  now  being  extended  from 
Keredinia  to  Nawala  Peteya,  seventeen  miles,  at  a  cost  of 
£260,000. 

In  1871  the  rupee  currency  was  legalised.  £2,999,000 
have  been  voted  for  public  works  (exclusive  of  the  cost  of  the 
railway  to  Kandy)  in  seven  years.  The  revenue  for  1871 
amounted  to  £1,121,679  ;  expenditure,  £1,064,184.  Under 
cultivation — ^rice,  777,622  acres  ;  other  grain,  82,712  ;  coffee, 
260,000;  cotton,  534;  tobacco,  16,972;  areca,  palmyra, 
and  kital  palms,  60,000;    cinnamon,   16,000;  other  fruit- 


494  STATISTICS—PENANG. 

bearing  trees,  50,000;  pasture,  637,579.  Total,  1,900,419 
acres.  Estimated  acreage  of  colony,  excluding  backwaters, 
is  12,075,335  acres  ;  so  that  aboat  ten  millions  remain  nn- 
cnltiyated.  Population,  mainly  agricultural,  being  by 'last 
census  (1871)  2,405,287.  Births  in  1871,  68,856;  deaths, 
46,803 ;  marriages,  1 1 , 1 78.  No  poor-law  in  Ceylon.  Colonial 
contribution  for  troops,  £160,000 ;  colonial  public  debt, 
£700,000  at  six  per  cent 

Ath. — Yesterday,  at  11  A.M.,  we  anchored  at  Penang,  after 
having  been  six  hours  sailing  in  a  circle  off  the  port,  with 
the  weather  so  thick  that  we  could  not  see  our  way  sufficiently 
clear  to  go  into  the  harbour.     Any  one  well  acquainted  with 
the  Straits  would  doubtless  have  gone  in  instead  of  remaining 
outside   steaming  in  a  circle  from  five  to   eleven  o'clock, 
for  we  had  always  had  some  one  or  other  of  the  highest 
points    of  land   visible ;    indeed,    quite    clear   of  fog,    or 
sufficiently  so,  to  enable  a   man  acquainted  with   the  en- 
trance  of  the   port   to   run   for  it;    but   our   captain  had 
not  been  through  these  straits  for  sixteen  years,  and  he  was 
therefore  timid,  and  very  rightly  would   not  run  until  he 
could  see  his  way  quite  clearly.     So  soon  as  we  anchored, 
all  our  passengers  went  on  shore,  an  easy  matter  at  Penang, 
compared  with  the  getting  on  shore  at  Galle.     Most  of  them 
chartered  carriages  at  the  jetty,  and  went  off  to  the  water- 
fall, a  drive  of  about  four  miles  along  the  shore,  through 
rich  tropical  vegetation.     I  had  been  over  the  ground  before, 
and  at  a  time  when  I  was  enabled  to  take  it  leisurely,  and 
therefore  to  enjoy  it,  and  when  I  could  combine  with  it  a 
walk  to  the  top  of  the  Governor's  Hill,  from  which  an  exten- 
sive and  interesting  view  of  the  straits  in  clear  weather  is 
obtained.     I  remained  consequently  in  the  town,  and  spent 
the  morning  among  the  ^^  John  Chinamen,"  all  of  them 
busily  engaged,  some  at  one  sort  of  work,  and   some  at 
another,  but  all  employed;   no  loafers,  no  idlers,  among 
these    Chinamen,   of  whom    the   population   of  the  island 
entirely,  or  almost  entirely,  consists.     You  might  walk  the 
streets  for  hours  without  meeting  with  either  a  Malay  or  a 
European ;  and  the  richest  men  in  the  place  are  to  be  found 
among  the  Chinamen.     As  fast  as  they  accumulate  wealth 
by  their  industry,  they  invest  it  in  houses   and  lands,  and 


PENANG,  495 

this  habit  of  John  Chinaman  has  led  to  a  great  increase 
during  the  last  few  years  in  the  value  of  house  property  in 
Penang.     Penang  itself  produces  nothing   for   export  but 
cocoa-nuts ;  the  business  done  here  is  entirely  in  manufac- 
tured goods,  and  in  the  produce  of  the  Straits  generally, 
brought  here  for  realisation.     By  a  steady  business,  and  also 
by  speculating  in  these  articles,  John  Chinaman  has  become 
rich.     When  Prince  Alfred  was  here  a  few  years  ago,  he  was 
entertained  by  a  Chinaman,  who  possesses  the  best  house  in 
the  island.     The  only  thing  produced  here  in  which  I  have  in- 
vested is  a  walking-stick,  called  from  its  formidability,  either 
for  attack  or  defence,  a  Penang  lawyer.     I  lunched  on  shore 
at  the  Victoria  and  Albert  Hotel,  kept  by  a  German,  who 
gave  us  some  very  good  fish ;  a  small  plantain  was  on  the 
table,  called  the  plantain  of  Paradise,  said  to  be  the  fruit 
with  which  Eve  tempted  Adam  and  brought  so  much  misery 
on  the  human  race,  which,  by  the  by,  may  be  considered 
very  hard  on  the  human  race,  seeing  that  the  human  race 
could  have  had  nothing  on  earth  to  do  with  the  temptation 
so  naughtily  indulged  in  by  Eve !     It  is  something  like  the 
platano  Ma  Isla^  which  is  such  a  fine  fruit  in  Lima,  but 
I  think  not  quite  equal  to  it.     Penang,  like  all  the  other 
Straits  settlements,  is  a  free  port,  and  hence  the  secret  of  its 
prosperity,  which  has  much  increased  since  the  opening  of 
the  Suez  Canal,  for  all  steamers  bound  to  China  or  Japan 
stop  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time  at   Penang.     As  we  left 
Ghdle  at  6  a.  if.  on  the  29th,  we  were  a  few  hours  over  five 
days  in  getting  to  Penang,  steaming  all  the  time  about  ten 
knots,  but  with  an  occasional  current  against  us  induced  by 
the  prevailing  north-east  wind. 

We  remained  at  Penang  five  hours  yesterday,  leaving  at 
4  p.if.,  and  we  are  now  pushing  our  way  down  not  a  very 
wide  channel,  the  surface  af  which  is  thickly  covered  with 
roots  and  branches  of  trees. 

To-morrow,  if  all  goes  well,  I  shall  have  reached  at  Singa- 
pore another  milestone  in  my  journey  towards  Japan,  and 
also  another  milestone  in  my  journey  towards  the  grave,  for 
to-morrow  will  be  my  seventieth  birthday. 

Delih,  on  the  island  of  Sumatra,  a  Dutch  settlement,  is, 
I  am  told,  becoming  a  place  of  some  importance  for  the  cul- 


496  DELIH— ISLAND  OF  SUMATRA. 

tivation  of  tobacco  and  nutmegs.  As  a  Datch  settlement,  it 
dates  back  only  some  five  or  six  years.  I  talked  about  it 
with  a  Dutch  planter  from  thence,  whom  I  met  at  Penang. 
He  had  come  to  Penang  to  engage  Chinamen  to  work  upon 
his  estate — the  Malays,  who  may  be  called  the  natives  of 
Sumatra,  being  absolutely  too  lazy  to  do  more  than  work 
sufficiently  just  to  keep  body  and  soul  together,  so  the 
tobacco  planters  have  to  depend  for  labour  upon  Penang. 
The  Chinamen  are  engaged  at  the  rate  of  five  dollars  a 
month ;  this  seems  low  wages,  and  still  they  save  money  out 
of  it  The  planter  had  already  engaged,  he  told  me,  fifty- 
five  Chinamen,  but  wanted  many  more.  They  had  had  an 
outbreak  on  the  part  of  the  hill  tribes  (the  Battas)  at  Delih 
lately,  and  were  obliged  to  bring  over  800  Dutch  troops  from 
Batavia  to  quell  it.  The  quality  of  the  tobacco  grown  at 
Delih  is  nearly,  if  not  quite,  equal  to  that  grown  at  Cuba. 
Nutmeg-trees  have  been  planted  largely,  but  they  don't  pro- 
duce yet ;  they  require  eight  years  before  they  produce  frait, 
but  they  seem  to  promise  well.  The  produce  of  Delih  is 
brought  to  Penang  in  small  steamers  for  shipment  to  Europe, 
only  small  steamers  of  shallow  draught  of  water  being  able 
to  get  up  the  river  to  Delih. 

fith. — We  anchored  about  noon  yesterday  in  the  new  har- 
bour of  Singapore,  having  been  forty-four  hours  in  coming 
from  Penang.     Quiet  weather  during  the  passage,  with  a  fair 
amount  of  rain.    The  approach  to  Singapore,  among  clusters 
of  islands  all  covered  with  verdure  down  to  the  water's  edge, 
is  very  pretty.     In  this  new  harbour  the  steamer  goes  along- 
side the  wharf,  very  convenient  for  the  landing  of  passengers, 
though  it  entails  upon  them  a  drive  of  four  miles  or  more 
up  to  the  Hotel  d*Europe  in  the  town,  off  which  is  the  port, 
where  the  bulk  of  the  shipping,  steamers  as  well  as  sailing 
vessels,  lie  at  anchor.    At  the  new  harbour  the  Peninsular 
and  Oriental  Company  have  a  small  island  to  themselves, 
connected  by  a  short  bridge  with  the  Singapore  island,  and 
upon  which  they  have  extensive  coalsheds  and  other  build- 
ings.    In    the  town,  directly  fronting  the  port,  some  few 
hundred  yards  back,  are  situated  all  the  public  buildings, 
the  courts,  town-hall,  post-office,  and  also  the  Hotel  d'Europe, 
consisting  of  three  or  four  houses  connected  by  subsidiary 


-1 
I 


SINGAPORE,  497 

LuildiDgs,  with  an  interesting  flower-garden  attached,  kept 
in  very  good  order.  It  is  no  doubt  one  of  the  best  hotels  in 
the  East.  A  large  and  beautiful  green  runs  along  between 
the  hotel  and  public  buildings,  and  the  shore  and  jetty  of 
the  port.  It  contains,  perhaps,  fifty  acres,  and  is  as  level  as 
a  well-kept  bowling-green,  and  around  it  is  the  fashionable 
evening  drive  of  Singapore.  This  open  space  along  the 
shore  tends  greatly  to  keep  the  place  cool.  The  latitude  of 
Singapore  is  1"  36'  north,  so  at  no  season  is  there  much 
danger  of  getting  one's  nose  frost-bitten.  There  was  a 
cricket-match  being  played  upon  the  green  yesterday  evening. 
The  Hotel  d'Europe  is  the  favourite  hotel,  though  there  are 
several  others  in  the  place.  Some  forty  or  more  people  sat 
down  to  dinner  at  the  table-cC hote  yesterday.  The  waiters 
are  all  Chinese,  and  very  good  waiters  they  make.  Just  now 
Ilajah  Brooke  of  Sarawak,  with  his  wife  and  children,  are 
staying  at  the  hotel ;  he  is  a  young  man,  the  son  of  the  first 
Bajah  Brooke,  elected  by  the  aristocracy  of  Sarawak  and 
Labuan  (the  chiefs)  to  the  position  which  his  father  filled  so 
long.  The  verandah  of  the  hotel  was  crowded  with  hawkers 
o£fering  for  sale  European  goods,  and  many  articles  of  the 
Straits*  manufacture,  as  well  as  a  sprinkling  of  Chinese  and 
Japanese  wares,  and,  of  course,  Malacca  spears  and  canes. 

9tfL — ^About  the  ship,  from  the  moment  of  her  arrival  up 
to  the  time  of  her  departure,  there  were  many  boats  filled 
with  shells  from  the  neighbouring  islands,  but  nearly  all  the 
very  delicate  ones  were  more  or  less  broken.  Malays  are  the 
principal  sellers  of  shells.  Malays,  too,  compose  the  police 
force  of  the  island.  They  are  little  fellows  compared  with 
the  Chinese,  but  I  am  told  they  are  very  plucky,  and  quite 
able  to  keep  John  Chinaman  in  order.  The  whole  popula- 
tion, they  say,  is  composed  almost  wholly  of  Chinese. 
Between  1  and  2  p.il  to-day  we  got  under  way  with  a 
full  cargo  of  produce,  consisting  of  opium,  hides,  hide- 
clippings,  and  sharks' fins;  these  Last  are  eaten  by  the  Chinese. 
There  were  two  or  three  new  passengers  to  take  the  place  of 
those  we  left  behind  at  Singapore.  Weather  cloudy  and 
water  smooth.  More  head-swell,  with  a  fresh  north-east 
breeze,  which  causes  more  shaking  than  we  have  hitherto 
experienced.     It  is  evident  we  have  a  current  against  us  of 

2i 


498  CANTON, 

one  to  two  knots   an  hour.    Weather  still  wann ;  thermo- 
meter in  mj  cabin  85^ 

\Mh. — We  arrived  here  (at  Hong-Kong)  this  morning  at 
about  eleven  o'clock,  thus  making  our  passage  from  Singi^re 
in  eight  days.  For  the  last  three  days  we  had  a  strong 
north-east  gale  to  contend  with,  during  which  onr  speed 
was  reduced  to  five  knots  an  hour.  The  distance  from 
Singapore  is  about  1450  miles.  When  we  first  encountered 
the  north-east  gale,  both  the  aneroids  and  the  barometers 
rose  considerably,  and  remained  afterwards  steady  for  more 
than  two  days  during  the  height  of  the  gale,  and  then  com- 
menced rising  still  higher,  and  continued  to  rise  still  higher, 
until  this  morning,  when  the  wind  moderated,  and  the  weather, 
from  having  been  very  squally  and  showery,  became  fine.  This 
is  difficult  to  understand,  that  the  aneroid  should  have  com- 
menced rising  when  the  gale  began,  have  remained  high  whilst 
the  gale  lasted,  and  have  risen  still  higher  as  the  gale  subsided 

17M. — Yesterday  at  8  a.m.  I  embarked  on  board  a  steamer, 
and  at  2.30  p.m.  arrived  here,  at  Canton,  and  proceeded  at 
once  to  the  ^^  Canton  Hotel,'*  where  I  am  comfortably 
enough  lodged.  The  weather  is  very  fine,  and  we  had  a 
pleasant  sail  up  from  Hong-Kong,  the  whole  route  being 
covered  with  Chinese  boats — ^thousands  of  them — coasting 
boats  and  fishing-boats,  principally  the  latter.  A  few  of  the 
islands — and  we  passed  many — were  covered  with  verdure, 
long  grass,  but  hardly  a  tree  anywhere  until  we  drew  near 
to  Whampoa,  some  ten  miles  before  reaching  Canton. 
Wherever  there  was  a  patch  of  trees  near  the  shore  there  was 
a  settlement  FLshing-nets  were  seen  everywhere  stretching 
out  from  the  shores  of  the  islands,  and  the  hauling  lines  for 
landing  them  and  taking  out  the  fish  were  led  over  pulleys 
and  wheels  fixed  on  the  slopes  of  the  hills  and  leading  down 
to  the  beaches.  As  we  approached  Canton,  the  whole  river 
was  alive  with  boats  moving  in  all  directions,  and  both  shores 
were  lined  with  stationary  boats.  The  great  bulk  of  these 
boats — all  of  them,  I  believe — contain  entire  families,  thus 
saving  the  expense  of  house-rent^  The  boat  in  which  I  em- 
barked to  come  to  the  hotel  at  Honan,  from  the  opposite 
side  of  the  river,  where  the  steamer  stopped,  was  about  twenty 
feet  long,  with  a  high,  broad,  roomy  sterm.     She  was  nicely 


CANTON.  499 

fitted  up  with  a  bamboo-and-mat  awDiDg,  with  seats  amid- 
ships  for   passengers,   and   scrupuloaslj  clean.      She  was 
sculled  and  rowed  by  a  man  and  his  wife  and  two  young 
girls,  their  daughters,  besides  whom  there  was  one  youDger 
child  and  a  baby.     This  little  boat  was  the  only  home  for 
all  these  people.     There  are   thousands  of  such  boats  with 
families  on  board  on  the  river  in  front  of  Canton.     After 
tiffin,    I   sallied   out  with    the   landlord    of   the    hotel    (a 
Portuguese)  to  look  at  Honan.      The  streets  on  this  side  the 
river  are  pretty  much  what  they  are  on  the  other,  from  seven 
to  twelve  feet  wide,  and  paved  with  slabs  of  granite,  for  the 
most  part  placed  across  them,  and  reaching  from  one  side  to 
the  other.     These  streets  are  kept  very  clean,  considering 
how  thickly  they  are  peopled.    The  butchers'  and  fishmongers' 
localities  struck  me    as    being  particularly   free   from  any 
approach  to  bad  smells.     We  visited  the  celebrated  Buddhist 
temple  of  Honan,   and  the  sacred  pigs — a  dozen  of  them 
now.     They  are  very  fat,  and  kept  tolerably  clean.     When 
they  do  die,  they  die  natural  deaths,  and  they  usually  live 
eight  to  ten  years.     We  saw  a  number  of  their  oflFspring  in 
another  part  of  the  enclosure,  bred  for  market.     They  were 
only  five  months  old,  and  would  weigh  probably  eight  score, 
and  the  price  was  seven  dollars — not  very  much  for  a  fat 
and  holy  pig  weighing   eight   score.     The  priests   in   the 
temple  were  performing  service  when  we  visited  it     Their 
heads  are  shaven,  «nd  their  dress  a  yellow  garment,  such  as 
is  worn  by  the  Buddhist  priests  at  Urga  on  the  plains  of 
Mongolia,  and  which  is,  I  believe,  the  colour  of  the  Buddhist 
priest's  dress  everywhere.     These  gentry  were  singing  and 
marching  round  inside  the  temple,  and  making  the  same 
genuflections  and  prostrations  before  the  image  of  Buddha 
that  Catholic  priests  make  to  their  saints.     The  ceremony 
seemed   identical  with  what  I  have   often  witnessed  when 
going  round  the  stations  in  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre 
at  Jerusalem ;  and  it  is  only  in  the   Church  of  the  Holy 
Sepulchre  that  the  brutish  heads  and  faces  that  I  saw  yester- 
day in  the  temple  of  Honan  can  be  matched.     I  have  often 
been  struck  by  the  degraded  and  bestial  expression  of  the 
monks  in  the  former  place.     I  was  told  that  many  of  the 
priests  in  this  temple  are  men  who  have  escaped  the  just 


500  CANTON. 

panishment  of  their  crimes  by  taking  refage  in  this  temple. 
I  remarked,  nnthinkinglyy  to  my  companion^  that  the 
mummery  we  were  witnessing  was  but  the  counterpart  of 
what  might  every  day  be  seen  in  the  churches  of  Catholic 
countries.  The  observation  took  him  rather  aback,  as  he 
was  a  Catholic,  which  I  did  not  remember  at  the  moment 
The  streets  through  which  we  passed  have  gates  at  either 
end,  always  shut  at  night,  and  a  watchman  stationed  at  each 
gate.  This  is  general  throughout  the  city,  and  must,  one 
would  think,  greatly  facilitate  the  apprehension  of  burglars. 
All  over  the  city  there  are  boxes  erected  on  bamboos,  to  a 
height  of  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet,  or  perhaps  more,  for 
they  very  much  overtop  the  highest  Chinese  houses,  in  which 
are  stationed  watchmen,  whose  duty  it  is  to  beat  a  tomtom, 
and  give  the  alarm  when  fire  breaks  out.  The  pawnbrokers' 
towers  are  also  conspicuous  edifices  in  Canton.  They  are 
built  of  brick,  five  or  six  stories  high,  and  are  supposed  to  he 
fireproof.  I  recollect  that  on  the  top  of  one  that  I  visited 
four  years  ago,  I  saw  deposited  there  for  defence  against  a 
street  attack,  a  number  of  jars  of  vitriol  and  heaps  of  large 
stones.  The  pawned  goods  are  arranged  on  shelves,  ?rith 
which  the  several  floors  are  fitted  up,  and  all  neatly 
labelled. 

After  breakfast  to-day,  accompanied  by  "  Cum,"  a  Chmese 
guide,  who  speaks  English  very  fairly,  I  crossed  the  river 
and  began  an  inspection  of  what  is  called  the  old  and 
new  cities  and  the  western  suburbs.  I  paid  a  long  visit  to 
the  jade-shops  and  to  the  jade-market.  This  stone  varies 
in  value  according  to  the  colour  and  its  density  or  hardness. 
The  commonest  sort,  in  its  rough  state,  sells  in  the  market 
at  from  two  to  three  dollars  a  catty  (IJ  lbs.),  whilst  the 
handsomest  sort,  a  fine  green  translucent  kind,  when 
worked  and  polished,  sells  at  fabulous  prices.  A  handsome 
piece,  in  the  shape  of  a  broad  finger-ring  lined  with  gold, 
which  I  saw,  had  been  sold  for  a  hundred  pounds;  for 
many  pairs  of  earrings,  of  the  simplest  and  plainest  work- 
manship, forty  dollars  were  asked ;  and  for  small  bits  of  the 
stone,  not  larger  nor  thicker  than  a  wafer,  and  of  irregular 
shape,  but  polished,  six  dollars  were  demanded^  entirely  on 
account  of  the  bright  green  colour  and  density  of  the  stone. 


CANTON,  501 

Armlets  and  earrings  of  perfectly  plain  workmanship  sell  for 
one  dollar  a  pair  up  to  a  hundred  dollars.  The  sale  of  jade 
ornaments  in  China  must  be  to  an  immense  amount,  for  all 
classes  wear  them.  It  is  marvellous  what  a  taste  there  is 
for  these  ornaments,  for,  to  my  mind,  unless  it  be  the  very 
choicest  bits,  the  jade  of  which  they  are  made  is  a  very  dull 
common-looking  stone.  The  same  taste  for  jade  ornaments 
is  met  with  in  New  Zealand,  but  nowhere  else  that  I  know 
of  in  the  world  is  the  article  for  ornamental  purposes  at  all 
appreciated.  For  beauty  of  colour  it  is  not  to  be  compared 
with  malachite,  and  yet  malachite  is  comparatively  valueless 

here.     Went  to  hear  Archdeacon  G preach  to-day;  the 

congregation  consisted  of  about  fifty  ladies  and  gentlemen, 
Europeans,  and  of  one  Chinaman,  who  went  off  to  sleep 
during  the  sermon — a  convert,  no  doubt.  Well,  I  may  be 
wrong,  but  I  have  no  faith  in  these  conversions,  even  the 
few  that  seem  to  be  made.  Surely  it  must  be  a  hopeless 
undertaking  for  a  few  hundreds  of  ordinary  minded-men, 
ay  !  or  any  class  of  men,  to  attempt  the  conversion  to  Chris- 
tianity of  the  four  or  five  hundred  millions  of  Hindoos  and 
Buddhists  that  inhabit  India  and  China.  It  must  be  vain 
to  suppose  that  these  people  can  ever  be  induced  to  abandon 
a  belief  which  has  been  entertained  by  them  for  thousands 
of  years,  dating  back  to  a  period  anterior  to  the  birth  of 
Christianity.  To  me  the  attempt  seems  perfect  madness. 
And  even  if  they  did  become  Christians,  these  people,  is  it 
quite  certain  they  would  be  anything  the  better  for  it? 
Judging  from  the  character  of  the  few  converts  that  have 
been  made,  the  contrary  would  seem  to  be  the  case.  My 
Christian  servant,  whom  I  had  travelling  with  me  in  India 
for  four  months,  only  in  one  respect  differed  from  his 
fellow  Hindoo  and  Mussulman  servants — that  is,  in  getting 
drunk  every  now  and  then,  which  they  never  did  ;  and,  curi- 
ously enough,  whenever  we  were  in  a  place  where  he  had  the 
means  of  confessing  and  taking  the  sacrament — for  he  was  a 
Catholic — he  always  returned  to  me  from  the  church  drunk. 
Missionaries  among  savages  would  seem  more  to  the  pur- 
pose— the  savages  in  the  islands  of  the  Pacific,  for  example, 
whose  minds,  as  regards  religion,  are  believed  to  be  pretty, 
much  a  tabula  rasa.      In  such  a  field,  and  with  such  2>eople^ 


S02  CANTON, 

one  would  think  the  mlssionarieB  could  hardly  help  doing 
good ;  and  yet,  as  it  would  seem  that  Christianity  invariably 
carries  with  it  certain  vices — civilised  vices  I  may  call  them^ 
which  often  end  in  the  total  destruction  of  the  races  among 
whom  they  are  introduced,  it  becomes  a  question  whether  it 
would  not  be  better  to  let  them  alone,  and  never  to  have  in- 
troduced Christianity  among  them.  The  Sandwich  islanders 
aflford  an  example  in  point.  From  400,000,  which  they  were 
computed  to  be  in  the  time  of  Cook,  they  have  now  dwindled 
down,  and  it  may  be  said  principally  under  missionary  rule, 
to  40,000,  and,  at  the  rate  at  which  they  are  diminishing, 
threaten  to  become  extinct  in  about  forty  years  hence ;  and 
it  is  in  the  Sandwich  Islands  that  missionary  labours  have 
more  than  elsewhere  been  held  up  as  an  instance  of  complete 
success  I 

I  have  heard  somebody  express  a  doubt  as  to  whether  in 
England  we  should  not  be  gainers  by  becoming  Mahome- 
tans, if  by  the  change  of  religion  we  could  get  rid  of  the 
vice  of  drunkenness. 

18^^ — Went  this  morning  with  Cum  to  the  city  side  of 
the  river,  and  remained  there  visiting  various  places  until 
nearly  four  o'clock.  At  the  execution  ground,  a  small  place 
in  the  centre  of  the  old  city,  covered  to-day,  when  I  was 
there,  by  various  articles  of  pottery  exposed  for  sale,  there 
are  still  to  be  seen  a  few  heads  of  malefactors,  executed 
within  the  past  year  or  two.  When  a  man  is  beheaded,  the 
body  is  usually  taken  outside  the  city  to  be  buried,  the  head 
being  left  behind,  and  impaled  for  the  edification  of  the 
people.  There  are  also  on  the  ground  a  dozen  or  more  large 
roughly-made  crosses,  to  which  criminals  are  fastened  when 
doomed  to  be  cut  to  pieces.  The  guide  told  me  the  last 
execution  of  this  sort  in  Canton  took  place  about  three  years 
ago.  A  young  and  handsome  woman,  who  had  poisoned 
her  husband,  was  stretched  upon  one  of  these  crosses  and 
executed,  her  limbs  cut  off,  and  her  bowels  protruding  before 
life  became  quite  extinct.  From  this  disgusting  place,  I 
went  to  see  the  famous  water-clock,  said  to  be  800  years  old. 
It  is  composed  of  nothing  more  nor  less  than  four  metal 
vessels  placed  one  above  another  on  a  retiring  stage,  the 
upper  one  holding  about  ten  gallons  of  water,  the  second 


CANTON,  503 

eight  gallons,  the   third  six   gallons,  and  the  fourth  four 
gallons.     In  the  lower  vessel,  protruding  through  a  slit  in 
the  cover,  is  a  sort  of  lath  or  flat  piece  of  wood,  rising 
straight  up,  three  to  four  feet  long  and  a  couple  of  inches 
broad,  upon  which  is   marked    a  graduated    scale  of  the 
twenty-four  hours,  quarters,  and  minutes.     The  lower  end  of 
this  piece  of  lath  is  fastened  to  a  movable  and  floating  disk 
of  wood,  lying  at  the  bottom  inside  the  vesseL     From  the 
upper  vessel  the  water  is  conducted  through  a  spout  into  the  one 
immediately  below  it,  from  thence  into  the  next  lowest  vessel, 
and  then  into  the  lowest  vessel  of  all,  from  which  the  lath 
with  the  hours  marked  upon  it  protrudes  through  the  cover. 
Of  course,  the  wooden  disk  inside  this  lower  vessel  to  which 
the  lath  is  affixed  keeps  rising  up  as  the  vessel  fills  with 
water,  forcing  up  the  lath  through  the  slit  in  the  cover. 
The  quantity  of  water  is  so  regulated  that  it  is  just  sufficient 
to  force  up  the  lath  with  the  hours  and  quarters  marked 
upon  it,  so  as  to  make  the  last  protruding  number  to  corre- 
spond with  the  hour  indicated  by  a  well-regulated  clock. 
This  water-clock  is  in  an  upstair-room  in  a  building  situated 
at  the  extremity  of  a  long  street ;  and  for  the  benefit  of  the 
people  living  thereabouts,  the  time  of  day  is  every  now  and 
then  marked  on  a  board,  and  exhibited  on  a  balustrade  in 
front  of  the  water-clock  room.     It  is  somewhat  ingenious, 
perhaps,  but  a  very  simple  mode  of  indicating  the  time. 
From  the  highest  to  the  lowest  vessel,  the  water  falls  a  dis- 
tance of  about  ten  feet      Afterwards  I  visited  a  temple  in 
which  is  a  sleeping  figure   of  Buddha,   lying  upon  a  bed 
covered  with  a  blanket  up  to  the  shoulders ;    it  is  of  wood 
gilded.     We  went  next  to  the  Temple  of  the  Five  Genii,  the 
story  attached  to  which  is  told  in  my  1868  diary.     In  an 
opium-smoking  saloon  there  were  only  half-a-dozen  fellows 
enjoying    the  happiness  produced  by   smoking  that  drug. 
They  were  stretched  on  a  slightly  raised  dais,  resting  their 
heads  on  small  wooden  pillows;  each  man  had  a  lighted 
lamp  by  his  side,  and  was  engaged  in  feeding  his  pipe,  into 
which,  through  a  very  small  hole,  he  pushed  the  opium  with 
a  steel  needle  previously  warmed,  and  smoking  at  the  same 
time.     Besides  the  places  I  have  named,  we  visited  several 
shops  where  jade  ornaments  were  being  manufactured,  ivory 


504  CANTON. 

balls  turned,  the  well-known  rice-paper  paintings  execated, 
tobacco  cut  up  with  a  plane,  as  a  carpenter  would  take  a 
shaving  off  a  board,  and  furniture  manufactured,  and  we 
ended  up  bj  going  to  a  teashop.  There  is  but  one  Mahome- 
tan mosque  in  Canton,  and  that  we  visited.  It  is  a  poor  little 
building,  and  only  remarkable  bj  its  simplicity  compared 
with  the  Buddhist  temples,  being  entirely  devoid  of  paint- 
ings or  painted  images  of  any  kind,  whilst  the  Buddhist 
temples  are  full  of  them.  We  next  visited  an  old  Tartar 
who  was  instructing  some  aspirants  for  the  army  in  the  use 
of  the  bow  and  arrow,  with  which  it  would  seem  many  of  the 
Chinese  troops  are  still  armed.  I  made  a  few  purchases,  for 
which  the  guide  paid  in  whole  and  in  chopped  dollars.  The 
chopped  dollars,  or  bits,  as  they  used  to  be  called  in  the 
West  Indies,  had  all  to  be  weighed  in  the  shopman's  tiny 
scale  attached  to  a  very  tiny  beam,  and  this  operation  occu- 
pied a  considerable  amount  of  time.  I  never  can  help  won- 
dering that  a  nation  so  ingenious,  so  industrious,  and  so 
trading  as  the  Chinese  undoubtedly  are,  should  never  have 
coined  either  gold  or  silver — nothing  but  the  miserable 
copper  cash — whilst  their  neighbours,  the  Japanese,  have 
had  coined  money  in  use  from  time  inunemorial.  The 
thermometer  stands  here  in  the  morning  and  evening  at 
72°  and  74". 

20^A. — Yesterday  I  went  with  Cam  up  the  river  to  visit 
some  gardens  and  a  duck-and-goose  hatching  establishment 
In  the  gardens  there  was  a  profusion  of  chrysanthemums  and 
camellias,  the  former  very  fine.  A  kind  of  small  box-tree  was 
there  cut  and  trained  into  a  variety  of  shapes.  Deer,  buffalo, 
frogs,  and  various  jsorts  of  fish,  besides  harps,  shells,  tables, 
and  chairs,  and  the  human  form  divine  dressed  in  European 
costume,  with  a  variety  of  other  figures,  were  all  represented 
here,  trained  by  the  patient  hand  of  John  Chinaman.  Much 
time  must  be  required  to  train  this  shrub  into  shapes  so  odd 
and  so  foreign  to  its  natural  habit  of  growth,  but  evidently, 
from  the  quantity  of  them  in  these  gardens  thus  trained,  such 
distortions  suit  the  taste  of  the  Chinese.  A  pair  of  dwarfed 
and  twisted  fruit-trees,  which  must  have  taken  years  of 
patient  labour,  were  worth,  I  was  told,  forty  pounds — ^so  much 
are  these  things  prized.     Not  half-a-dozen  trees  in  the  three 


CANTON.  505 

gardens  I  visited  that  were  sot  dwarfed.  Orange-trees,  not 
more  than  two  to  three  feet  high,  were  loaded  with  good-look- 
ing fruit ;  all  the  plants  were  in  pots.  From  these  gardens 
I  passed  to  the  duck-hatching  establishment,  and  found  that 
the  operation  was  suspended,  and  would  not  be  resumed  until 
the  spring,  the  cool  weather  of  winter  not  favouring  the  pro- 
cess. The  work  consists  in  placing  the  eggs  on  very  large 
shelves  covered  over  with  a  thick  layer  of  the  ashes  of  burnt 
straw,  in  which  the  eggs  are  half  buried,  and,  when  need  be, 
covering  them  over  with  a  layer  of  cotton.  There  were  three 
large  shelves,  one  above  the  other,  in  the  room  I  visited. 
During  the  first  three  weeks,  the  eggs,  I  was  told,  occupied 
these  shelves,  being  constantly  turned,  and  if  at  any  time  found 
to  be  too  warm,  they  were  put  into  baskets  to  cool.  After 
three  weeks  the  eggs  are  removed  into  a  warmer  room,  and 
there  they  remain  until  the  ducklings  are  hatched.  The 
Chinaman  employs  no  thermometer  by  which  to  regulate  the 
heat;  his  own  feelings  are  the  only  guide  in  the  matter. 
Seventy  is  the  average  number  produced  by  every  hundred 
eggs.  I  believe  that  chickens  are  hatched  in  the  same-  way, 
though  I  received  some  conflicting  accounts  on  that  head ; 
but  when  eggs  are  put  under  a  hen  to  be  hatched,  the  hen  is 
made  to  come  off  the  nest  every  day  to  be  fed.  The  China- 
man does  not  believe  in  too  close  sitting.  He  says  the  eggs 
require  to  be  partially  cooled  every  day,  and  the  health  of  the 
hen  requires  that  she  should  come  off  the  nest;  so  that  if  the 
hen  does  not  come  off  the  nest  willingly,  she  is  dragged  off 
neck  and  crop.  I  could  not  but  think,  as  I  came  away  from 
this  duck -hatching  establishment,  that  our  hot-houses  at 
home  might  be  turned  to  account  for  the  purpose  of  hatch- 
ing eggs. 

I  have  again  visited  the  city,  and  bought  five  dozen  rice-paper 
paintings  at  the  shop  of  the  best  painter  in  that  style  in  Canton, 

for  which  I  paid  fifteen  dollars.     Visited  Archdeacon  G , 

who  seemed  to  have  a  lively  recollection  of  our  tramp  together 
three  years  ago  through  Canton.  I  found  him  busily  em- 
ployed in  packing  up  his  valuable  collection  of  old  china  and 
other  articles  for  the  Vienna  Exhibition.  In  the  evening, 
accompanied  our  Consul  to  his  residence  in  the  city,  where  I 
dined.     We  went  in  chairs,  the  coolies  trotting  along,  itnd 


So6  CANTON. 

doing  the  three  miles  (the  distance  between  the  Consulate  aod 
the  Consul's  residence)  in  half  an  hour.  At  ten  o'clock  I 
returned  in  the  same  way  to  the  boat,  to  be  taken  to  the 
hotel  at  Honan,  through  streets  in  which  there  was  no  one 
astir  but  the  watchmen,  and  even  these  worthies  we  had 
sometimes  to  waken  up  to  unlock  the  street  gates  to  enable 
us  to  pass.  We  must  have  passed  some  twenty  of  these 
gates.  All  the  streets  in  Canton  have  sewers  (I  am  told) 
running  through  them,  covered  up  by  the  pavement,  leading 
into  a  main  sewer  in  communication  with  the  river.  The 
precious  water-closet  matter  is  not  allowed  to  pass  into  these 
sewers,  but  is  collected  and  carried  away  in  buckets  at  all 
hours  1o  boats  constructed  for  receiving  and  carrying  it  into 
the  country  up  and  down  the  river.  There  are  public  closets 
all  through  the  city.  It  is  marvellous  how  clean  these 
narrow  streets  (seven  to  twelve  feet  wide)  are  kept,  and  how 
free  from  bad  smells,  thronged  as  they  are  with  population, 
and  with  fish-stalls,  fruit-stalls,  and  vegetables  in  almost  all 
of  them.  I  was  particularly  struck  by  the  number  of  for- 
tune-telling shops  in  Canton ;  they  are  everywhere  through- 
out the  city,  and  most  of  them  appear  to  be  driving  a 
flourishing  trade,  if  one  might  judge  by  the  crowds  always 
hanging  about  them. 

The  new  French  cathedral  is  progressing  very  slowly,  the 
war  having  interfered  with  obtaining  the  necessary  funds 
for  its  completion.     There  are,  however,  some  few  workmen 
still  employed  upon  it     Sharman,  where  the  foreigners  are 
located,  has  been  made  into  an  island  by  cutting  a  canal, 
and  a  noble  river-face-wall,  backed  up  by  a  solid  twelve  feet 
of  chunam,  runs  along  its  whole  length.     A   church  and 
many  handsome  dwelling-houses  have  been  already  erected 
on  it,  and  several  more  are  now  being  built     There  is  a 
large  garden  in  front  of  the  British  Consulate,  and  a  row  of 
trees  all  along  the  river  front     The  Consul  superintended  the 
formation  of  this  locality  for  the  residence  of  foreigners; 
and  the  manner  in  which  it  has  been   completed  is  verj 
creditable  to  him.    At  8.80  a.m.  I  embarked  on  board  the 
steamer,  and  in  half  an  hour  afterwards  we  were  on  our  way 
to  Hong-EoDg.      The   climate  here  in  this  month  and  the 
next  is  very  enjoyable,  the  thermometer  in  the  shade  mark- 


CANTON.  507 

ing  not  much  over  70^  On  board  these  steamers,  American 
built,  but  sailing  under  the  English  flag,  are  four  large  tubs, 
about  eight  feet  in  diameter  and  four  feet  deep,  in  which 
daily  from  six  to  seven  thousand  fish,  bred  in  stews,  some  of 
them  weighing  ten  pounds,  and  as  fat  as  pigs,  are  conveyed 
to  the  Hong-Kong  market  Just  before  the  steamers  leave 
the  wharf  at  Canton,  the  well-boats,  containing  the  fish, 
come  alongside ;  some  men  at  once  set  to  work,  filling  the 
tubs  with  water  from  the  river,  and  the  fish  are  then  taken 
out  of  the  boats  in  baskets  and  thrown  into  the  tubs.  Another 
tub,  about  three  feet  deep,  stands  upon  the  edge  of,  and 
above  the  large  tubs,  to  which  is  attached  three  feet  of  three- 
inch  bamboo,  in  which  are  two  circular  slits  near  the  ex- 
tremity; and  on  the  tub  being  filled,  the  water  rushes  out 
through  the  slits  in  two  fanlike  jets,  falling  back  into  the  large 
tubs  whence  it  has  been  taken.  From  the  time  the  boatmen 
commence  transferring  the  fish  from  the  boats  to  the  large 
tubs,  until  the  steamer  arrives  at  Hong-Kong  (about  seven 
hours),  one  man  is  constantly  employed  in  dipping  water 
with  a  bucket  from  the  large  tubs,  and  pouring  it  into  the 
small  one,  whence  it  issues,  as  I  have  already  said,  in  two 
continuous  jets  through  the  slits  in  the  bamboo,  running 
back  into  the  large  tubs,  and  in  this  manner  aerating  the 
water,  and  keeping  the  fish  alive  up  to  the  time  of  their 
arrival  in  Hong-Kong.  These  fish  are  hatched  in  pans,  and 
when  about  an  inch  long,  are  turned  into  ponds,  and  there 
fed  until  they  are  fat  and  large  enough  for  market  The 
Chinaman  utilises  most  things.  A  few  miles  up  the  river 
the  clay  is  found  of  which  bricks  are  made.  It  is  dug  out 
close  to  the  river-side  in  long  wide  trenches ;  and  these 
trenches,  the  water  being  turned  into  them  from  the  river, 
form  ponds,  and  are  made  use  of  for  breeding  fish — ^a  business 
which  must  be  carried  on  to  an  incalculable  extent,  for  in 
this  way  the  city,  the  country  districts  in  the  neighbourhood, 
and  Hong-Kong  are  partially  supplied,  Hong-Kong  itself 
taking  daily  about  six  thousand  fish.  John  Chinaman  is 
indeed  a  large  consumer  of  fish.  It  must  not  be  supposed, 
however,  that  fish  is  not  plentiful  on  the  sea-coasts  of 
China;  on  the  contrary,  I  should  think  that  no  sea  can 
boast  of  such  an  abundance  of  fish,  and  nowhere  is  the  sea 


5o8  HONG-KONG. 

more  fished.  Fishing-boats  swarm  everywhere  along  the 
coast  The  two  rivers  on  which  Canton  is  situated  are  the 
Chookiang  and  the  Pekiang. 

2%d. — Hong-Kong  has  greatly  increased  in  size  and  popu- 
lation within  the  last  few  years ;  it  is  now  a  very  fine  town, 
orderly,  and  with  well-kept  streets,  and  seemingly  a  good  and 
efficient  police,  composed  of  Scotchmen  imported  for  the  pur- 
pose, Sikhs,  and  Chinamen,  the  Sikhs  forming  the  balk  of 
the  force,  many  of  them  speaking  English.  It  is  very  seldom 
that  any  of  our  countrymen  study  Chinese,  or  ever  learn  to 
speak  it ;  and  it  is  for  this  reason,  I  suppose,  that  so  many 
Chinese  learn  to  speak  pigeon-English. 

26M. — The  boatmen,  the  chair-bearers,  the  hotel  ser- 
vantSy  and  servants  in  English  establishments,  all  speak 
more  or  less  English ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  they  think  our 
countrymen  very  stupid  in  not  being  able  to  talk  Chinese.  Bat 
so  it  is  ;  we  do  not  care  to  learn  the  language.  It  is,  no  doubt, 
very  short-sighted  on  our  part  not  to  study  the  language  of  a 
country  in  which  so  many  of  us  pass  the  best  years  of  our  lives ; 
for  a  knowledge  of  their  language  would  give  us  decided 
advantages  in  our  intercourse  with  the  natives  beyond  what 
we  now  possess  by  holding  converse  with  them  in  pigeon- 
Euglish.  The  very  few  foreigners  who  can  converse  fluently 
in  Chinese,  and  who  really  understand  the  language,  are 
looked  up  to  by  Chinamen  as  very  superior  beings. 

Yesterday  I  went  to  hear  Dr  Legge  preach.     He  is  an  old 
resident  of  China,  and  one  of  the  few  who  has  for  many 
years  studied  the  natives.     He  is  a  pleasing  and  effective 
preacher — a  Congregationalist.     I  am  here   in  the  Hong- 
Kong  Hotel,  a  large  and  well-cpnducted  establishment    The 
building  was   erected  by  a  company,  who  spent  a  deal  of 
money  in  it,  aud  who  entirely  broke  down  in  their  manage- 
ment, as  did  also  a   Chinaman  who  afterwards  rented  it 
furnished  from  the  company  at  |2500  a  month.     It  is  now 
in  the  hands  of  a  Parsee,  at  a  reduced  rent  (|2000  a  month). 
The  table  and  the  attendance  are  the  best  I  have  met  with  in 
this  part  of  the  world.    The  servants  are  all  Chinese.    Whilst 
waiting  at  table,  they  wear  a  round  black  hat,  and  a  long 
blue  shirt,  reaching  to  their  heels,  over  their  other  clothes, 
and  all  of  them  have  tails,  natural  or  artificial — an  admix- 


HONG-KONG  TO  YOKOHAMA,  509 

tnre  of  both    in  many  cases — that   reach  to  the   ground. 
They  are  mpst  orderly,  quiet,  respectful,  and  very  efficient 

29M,  on  board  the  *  China.' — At  3  p.m.  on  the  27th  we  left 
Hong-Kong  for  Yokohama,  and  up  to  noon  the  next  day  we 
had  made  a  run  of  144  miles.     The  China  is  one  of  the  big 
American  steamers  running  between  Hong-Eong,  Yokohama, 
and  San  Francisco.     She  is  upwards  of  4000  tons  burthen, 
and  is  420  feet  long.     Her  engines  are  something  enormous, 
with  a  walking  beam  weighing  thirty  tons,  and  she  burns 
forty  tons  of  coal  daily.     Her  utmost  speed  does  not,  I 
believe,  exceed  eight  knots  an  hour,  so  that  she  is  too  slow 
for   these  days,  when  time  may  be  truthfully  said  to  be 
money.     This  big  ship  is,  however,  very  comfortable.     As  I 
write,  there  is  a  stiff  breeze  blowing  and  a  good  deal  of  sea 
running,  but  she  is  almost  as  steady  as  if  she  were  at  anchor 
in  Hong-Kong.     She  is  rigged  with  three  very  short  masts, 
upon  which  she  can  set  fore-and-aft  sails,  and  on  deck  are 
some  square  yards,  to  which  are  bent  and  hoisted  square 
sails  when    the    wind  permits.     In  the  saloon  160   people 
may  dine  comfortably  off  two  rows  of  tables,  as  at  present 
arranged,  and  there  is  width  enough,  .if  need  be,  for  another 
row  of  tables  between  the  two  existing  rows.     On  both  sides 
of  the  saloon  are  very  good  cabins,  and  also  underneath  on 
the  main  deck.     The  accommodation  for  steerage  passengers 
and  Chinamen  forward  on  the  main  deck  is  good.     The  for- 
mer pay  one  half  of  what  first-clnss  passengers  pay,  and  the 
latter  fifty  dollars  a  head  from  Hong-Kong  or  from  Yoko- 
hama to  San  Francisco,  and  if  any  of  them  die  on  board,  the 
bodies  are  embalmed  and  carried  to  the  port  of  destination, 
for  which  operation  their  friends  pay   the  ship's  surgeon 
twenty-five  dollars.     Until  to-day,  ever  since  we  have  been 
out,  we  have  been  sailing  through  what  Americans  call  a 
crowd  of  junks  and  fishing-boats,  and  even  now,  though  we 
have  no  longer  land  in  sight,  we  have  still  some  boats.     Over 
the  saloon  is  a  spacious  well-furnished  drawing-room,  on  a 
deck  which  extends  the  whole  length  of  the  ship.     My  aneroid 
has  risen  considerably  with  the  freshening  of  the  north-east 
monsoon  since  yesterday.     Bun  to-day  175  miles. 

I  paid  my  old  friend  Chang  the  giant  a  visit  before   I 
left  Hong-Kong.     He  told  me  he  had  been  robbed  by  the 


5IO  YOKOHAMA. 

Englishman  who  had  charge  of  him  and  his  affairs  when  I 
saw  him  at  Honolulu,  and  also  that  he  had  lost  a  good  deal 
of  money  in  a  tea  speculation  since  his  arrival  in  China,  and 
that  it  would  take  him  some  months  of  work  to  recuperate, 
and  then  he  intended  to  retire  to  his  native  village  in  China 
and  live  quietly.  His  child  was  dead  he  told  me,  and  he 
seemed  to  feel  the  loss.  His  wife  was  in  Hong-Kong  living 
quietly  at  a  small  hotel. 

On  going  on  deck,  I  find  that  we  are  surrounded  by  fishingi* 
boats — several  hundreds  of  them — some  of  them  onlyjnst 
discernible  outside  of  us.  They  are  all  close-reefed,  and  at 
work  fishing,  riding  the  waves  like  so  many  gulls. 

December  3d. — At  9  a.m.  to-day  we  were  abreast  of  the 
volcano  of  Imoya  Soma,  and  not  more  than  ten  miles  from 
it — 2351  feet  high.  Weather  fine ;  water  smooth,  and  little 
wind.  Imoya  Soma  was  sending  forth  a  good  volume  of 
smoke  from  the  main  crater,  almost  on  the  summit,  and 
considerable  jets  of  smoke  from  many  other  parts — the 
lowest  jet  being  about  half  way  down  the  mountain.  This 
volcano  is  for  the  most  part  bare  of  trees,  so  far  as  we  could 
see  passing  it  on  the  nprthern  side,  a  few  only  being  visible 
on  the  ridge  of  the  lower  tableland  at  its  western  extremity. 

8tk,  Yokohama. — We  anchored  here  a  little  outside  the 
shipping  at  midnight  on  the  5th^  having  made  the  passage 
from  Hong-Kong  in  eight  days  and  nine  hours,  beating  the 
Peninsular  and  Oriental  mail  steamer  Madras  by  a  few 
hours.  We  had  fine  weather  on  4th  and  5th,  with  smooth 
water,  running  along  inside  the  islands,  always  in  sight  of 
land.  Some  whales  played  about  us  for  a  while  for  oar 
amusement,  and  a  shoal  of  flying-fish  came  along  with  ns  on 
our  quarter,  showing  an  inclination  to  come  on  board ;  but, 
I  suppose,  they  found  we  were  too  high  out  of  the  water  for 
their  powers  of  flight  I  learned  on  board  afterwards,  however, 
that  one  fish  had  managed  to  fly  on  board  on  to  the  hurri- 
cane-deck, a  height  of  twelve  to  fourteen  feet  above  the 
water.  (In  the  Ayacucho  in  1825,  in  running  across  the 
trades,  in  the  morning  our  deck  used  to  be  covered  with 
them,  and  very  nice  we  found  them ;  but  then  the  Ayaatcko 
was  so  low  in  the  water  that  I  could  wash  my  hands  over 
the  side.)    About  ten  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  5th,  we 


TOCAinO,  511 

• 

got  sight  of  the  mountain  of  Fusiyama.  We  coald  see  about 
half  of  it ;  the  lower  half  being  buried  in  a  dense  mass  of 
clouds,  in  which  it  remained  buried  up  to  sunset.  The  upper 
conical  half,  distant  about  seventy  miles  from  us,  was  seen 
as  clear  as  a  bell  all  day,  towering  up  into  the  sky  above 
and  beyond  the  mainland.  It  had  a  dense  covering  of  snow, 
and  was  really  a  noble  object,  so  high  and  distinct  was  it 
above  all  the  other  land  visible  about  us.  The  height  is 
14,460  feet.  On  the  4th  and  5th  we  saw  many  Japanese 
boats,  but  nothing  like  the  crowd  we  sailed  through  on  the 
coast  of  China. 

\Zth, — At  7.30  A.M.  started  in  a  trap  drawn  by  three  ponies 
from  Yokohama.  At  1.30  this  afternoon  reached  Adawarra 
(thirty-eight  miles),  and  this  place,  Meanosheta,  on  foot,  at 
5  P.M.,  having  left  Adawarra  at  two— distance  eight  miles. 
The  road,  which  is  good  all  the  way,  barring  a  couple  of 
small  rickety  bridges  we  had  to  pass,  and  two  rivers  across 
which  we  had  to  be  ferried,  leads  for  nine-tenths  of  the  whole 
way  through  thriving  villages,  and,  with  the  exception  of 
one  or  two  low  hills,  it  is  quite  level.  Adawarra  is  a  fishing 
town  on  the  sea-shore.  And  what  have  I  seen  on  this  day^s 
journey?  Well,  on  the  Tocaido  I  have  seen  many  hun- 
dreds of  ginrickshas  travelling  to  and  from  Yokohama,  each 
drawn  by  one  man  and  carrying  one  passenger,  always 
trotting  along  at  a  good  round  pace,  and  many  of  the  men 
drawing  the  ginrickshas  all  but  naked,  though  the  thermo- 
meter to-day  must  have  been  about  40'',  and  these  are  the 
fellows  who  generally  bathe  once  a  day  in  nearly  boiling  hot 
water  I  No  Japanese  ever  bathes  in  cold.  Of  beggars, 
there  must  have  been  100  at  least  stationed  along  the  road- 
side plying  their  profession,  prostrating  themselves  to  any 
one  they  thought  might  give  them  a  "  cash;"  hundreds  of 
sturdy  ponies,  with  light  loads  of  charcoal,  rice,  and  salt  (I 
think),  and  with  straw  shoes  on,  were  travelling  towards 
Yokohama  and  Yeddo,  but,  besides  the  ginrickshas,  not  a 
single  wheeled  vehicle ;  tea-houses  innumerable,  with  their 
dainty  dishes  of  chow-chow  tempting  the  passers-by ;  heaps 
of  children,  and  every  little  girl  between  five  and  ten  years 
of  age,  and  of  course  many  grown-up  girls  and  women 
besides,  carried  babies  strapped  to  their  backs ;  so  the  culti- 


/• 


512         '    MEANOSHETA—HAKONEDGEKO. 

vation  of  the  human  species  thrives  apace  in  Japan^  and  U 
more  prolific  perhaps  even  than  the  cultivation  of  the  land, 
which  is  neat  and  clean  in  the  extreme.  As  we  came 
through  4  village  about  four  miles  from  this,  Tonosava,  I 
turned  a  few  yards  out  of  the  principal  street  to  look  at  a 
hot  mineral-bath  the  boy  told  me  was  there,  and  found  a  girl 
the  only  occupant ;  a  man  who  had  been  in  the  same  bath 
had  just  got  out  The  damsel  remained,  seemingly  not  at  all 
put  out  by  my  visit.  I  put  my  hand  into  the  water,  and: 
judged  the  temperature  to  be  about  90^  My  aneroid  makes 
this  place  about  1300  feet  above  the  sea. 

\^thy  Meanosheta, — At  10  a.m.  yesterday,  with  Mr  G ,  I 

left  Meanosheta  for  a  walk  to  At&mi,  a  distance  of  about 
nineteen  miles.     Ashenoya  was  the  first  village  we  reached, 
about  four  miles  from  Meanosheta,  and  about  1400  feet  more 
elevated,  or  about  2800  feet  above  the  sea.     Here  are  some 
hot  sulphur-baths,  in  which,  the  day  before  yesterday,  I  saw 
ten  men,  women,  and  children  bathing  together.     The  next 
place  we  came  to  was  Hakonedgeko,  about  four  miles  farther 
on  the  way.     There  are  between  these  two  places  numerous 
small  temples,  moss-grown  all  of  them,  and  one  stone  figure 
about  ten  feet  high,  in  a  sitting  posture,  cut  out  of  a  rock  on 
the  side  of  a  hill.    All  these  temples,  large  and  small,  and  thej 
are  very  numerous  that  one  meets  with,  seem  much  neglected, 
and  seem  to  be  of  but  little  account  in  these  days  of  trans- 
formations in  Japan.     This  place,  Hakonedgeko,  is  situated 
on  the  borders  of  the  lake  of  Hakofii,  and  is  approached  by 
an  avenue  of  noble  trees,  the  cryptomeria,  one  of  which  I 
measured  about  five  feet  from  the  ground,  and  found  it  to 
to  be  fifteen  feet  in  circumference,  and  the  height  of  all  the 
trees  of  the  avenue  might  be  about  100  feet.     Hakofii,  or 
Hakonedgeko,  is  a  large  village,  or  rather  a  town,  running 
along  the   border  of  a  lake  of  the  same   name,  with  the 
Tocaido  passing  through  it ;  and  although  we  were  told  that 
the  lake  was  full  of  fish,  we  could  not  find  one  to  purchase 
as  we  passed  through.     The  place  abounds  in  tea-houses,  and 
in   the  summer-time  is  a  favourite  resort  for  visitors  from 
Yokohama.    Its  height  above  the  sea  is  about  2200  feet.  From 
Hakonedgeko  to  At&mi  is  about  thirteen  miles,  for  it  took  us 
four  and  a  half  hours  to  walk.     On  starting  from  Hakofii, 


HAKONITO  AtXmL.  513 

• 

there  is  an  abrupt  rise  of  1000  feet,  and  here  the  greatest 
height  between  the  two  places  is  reached,  3200  feet.     All 
across  from  this  point,  over  a  sort  of  backbone,  precipitous 
in  good  part  on  both  sides,  until  the  temple  of  Sha^gnani  is 
reached,  about  twelve  miles,  the  road,  or  rather  bridle-path,  is 
undulating,  the  aneroid  showing  it  to  varj  from  3200  feet,  the 
highest  point,  to 2250,  the  lowest,  which  is  attained  on  reaching 
the  temple,  from  which  jou  look  down  a  precipitous  descent  of 
2250  feet  on  to  the  sea-shore,  where  the  village  of  At&mi  is 
located.     These  twelve  miles  across  the  ridge  is  along  a  path 
running  for  a  little  way  through  low  scrubs,  but  principally 
through  forests  of  bamboo  and  long  grass,  no  large  trees 
being  met  with  anywhere.     A  few  hawthorn  trees  are  seen 
here.    There  was  no  cultivation  on  this  ridge,  but  it  seemed 
to  me  to  be  adapted  for  the  pasturage  of  horned  cattle.  How- 
ever, it  would  seem  the  Japanese  do  not  think  so,  for  once 
off  the  Tocaido  in  this  part  of  Japan,  you  don't  meet  with  a  * 
single  head  of  cattle  anywhere.     There  were  icicles  every- 
where in  the  shady  parts  of  the  road,  and  at  the  temple  of 
Shangnani  some  water  in  a  tub  was  covered  with  ice  more 
than  half  an  inch  thick.    The  descent  from  this  temple  down 
to  At&mi  is  very  precipitous.     A  valley  of  no  great  extent 
rwi%  inland  from  the  village,  and  the  produce  of  it,  rice  and 
barley,  added  to  the  fish  supplied  in  any  quantity  by  the 
open  sea,  feeds  the  1400  inhabitants  of  Ati^mi  to  their  heart's 
content.    On  reaching  the  village,  we  took  up  our  quarters  at 
an  extensive  tea-house,  in  the  courtyard  or  compound  of 
which  a  furious  issue  of  steam  sallies  forth  every  six  hours, 
lasting  a  quarter  or  half  an  hour,  and  is  followed  by  a  stream 
of  hot  water,  which  ran  up  our  thermometer  to  the  boiling 
point,  21 2^    This  also  lasted  only  for  awhile.    The  stream 
of  steam,  which  &sues  from  a  fissure  in  the  ground  in  a 
slanting  direction,  is  in  a  larger  body,  and  makes  a  greater 
noise,  than  the  steam  from  the  pipe  of  one  of  our  largest 
steamers  when  blowing  off  from  a  full  head  of  steam.      Of 
course,  there  is  always  steam  issuing  from  the  fissures  in  the 
ground  of  the  compound,  and  hot  water  also ;  but  the  great 
rush  of  both  takes  place  at  high  water,  showing,  apparently, 
that  the  tide  may  have  something  to  do  with  the  phenomena. 
The  baths  at  the  hotel  ore  supplied  from  a  higher  level ;  each 

2k 


514  ATAmL 

bath  has  a  division  in  the  centre,  one  division  containing  the 
water  as  it  oomes  from  the  spring  boiling  hot,  and  the  other 
in  which  he  bathes,  tempered  by  the  occnpant  as  he  may 
desire  by  admitting  hot  water.    There  must  be  a  boiling 
canldron  nnder  the  feet  of  these  people  at  At&mi,  though  it 
does  not  seem  to  disturb  the  equanimity  of  their  temper. 
We  had  hardly  settled  ourselves  down  in  the  rooms,  occupied 
in  other  days  for  three  weeks  by  Sir  R.   Alcock,  when  we 
were  treated  to  a  smart  shock  of  earthquake,  which  shook  the 
Japanese  paper  house  as  if  it  had  been  a  basket ;  but  so 
slight  are  these  fabrics,  that  I  felt,  even  if  the  house  had 
fallen  upon  me,  I  should  have  suffered  no  harm  from  it 
These  shocks  are  frequent^  I  believe,  but  do  little  or  no 
damage.     Attached  to  the  tea-house  is  a  small  manufactory 
of  paper  made  from  the  bark  of  a  tree  (called  the  paper-tree 
or  manui).     The  paper  made  here  is  very  fongh,  and  with 
difficulty  torn.    The  Japanese  always  carry  about  with  them 
a  stock  of  paper,  stuck  into  the  breast  of  their  cloak,  or  into 
a  girdle,  which  serves  the  same  purpose  as  pocket-handker- 
chiefs with  us.     Sir  R  Alcock  gives  a  graphic  description  of 
Atkmi,  of  this  tea-house,  and  of  the  death  and  burial  of  his 
dog  Toby.     Alas,  poor  Toby  1  your  grave  is  now  covered  by 
a  suite  of  rooms,  and  I  discovered,  after  a  good  deal  of  hunt- 
ing about,  the  base  or  socket  of  your  monument,  cast  upon 
a  heap  of  rubbish  on  one  side  of  the  new  building,  and  your 
monument  itself  on  the  other,  also  mixed  up  with  rubbish. 
I  am  afraid  the  trouble  taken  by  your  master  to  keep  some 
thought  of  you  alive  will  have  been  all  in  vain. 

We  were  seven  hours  in  walking  to  At&mi  yesterday,  and 
eight  hours  and  a  half  in  returning  to  Meanosheta  to-day ; 
it  was  seven  o'clock  before  we  reached  this  tea-house,  and 
although  we  saw  the  full  moon  just  as  n^e  left  Ashenoja 
(1450  feet  above  Meanosheta),  the  descent  is  so  rapid,  and 
the  hills  so  high  round  about,  that  we  soon  lost  sight  of  it, 
and  it  was  of  little  or  no  use  in  enabling  us  to  tread  the 
crooked  path  with  safety.  A  good  Samaritan  quickly  joined 
us  from  Ashenoya,  bringing  with  him  a  splendid  torch  in  the 
shape  of  a  blazing  bundle  of  reeds,  and  lighted  us  all  the 
way  down  the  steep  declivity.  In  crossing  the  ridge  from 
Atiuni  to  Hakonedgeko,  we  had  a  fine  view  of  Fusiyama, 


HATTA^MEAI^OSHETA,  515 

covered  with  snow  to  about  one-third  of  its  whole  height,  and 
also  of  the  deep  gorges  on  both  sides  of  the  ridge,  and  of  the 
extensive  plain,  gradually  rising  up  to  the  foot  of  Fusiyama 
on  the  one  side,  and  of  the  sea  on  the  other.  The  mineral 
springs  of  Atimi  contain  iron,  I  believe,  with  a  trace  of 
sulphur.  On  leaving  the  different  tea-houses  we  visited  yes- 
terday and  to-day,  the  master  and  mistress,  with  a  host  of 
attendants,  always  accompanied  us  to  the  outside  of  the 
house  and  into  the  road,  and  there  made  their  last  salaam  by 
bending  down  and  almost  touching  the  ground  with  their 
noses.  My  walk  on  the  14th,  before  the  arrival  of  Mr  G.,  was 
to  Hatta,  Hakonedgeko,  and  Ashenoya,  and  back  to  Meano- 
sheta,  about  fifteen  miles.  The  tea-house  at  Hatta  (where  I 
bought  £4  worth  of  curios)  is  famous  as  having  in  other 
days  been  the  resting-place  of  the  northern  Daimios  when 
travelling  to  and  from  Yeddo.  It  is  a  large  establishment, 
with  a  noted  Japanese  garden  in  the  rear,  with  miniature 
waterfalls  tumbling  over  rocks  on  the  face  of  a  steep  incline, 
and  forming  at  the  bottom  a  quiet  little  reservoir,  stocked 
with  gold  and  some  nondescript  fish,  some  of  them  two  feet 
long. 

17 tA. — Last  evening,  when  we  arrived  here  (Meanosheta) 
from  At&mi,  the  weather  was  cold  but  fine,  with  no  indication 
of  change.  On  getting  up  this  morning,  we  found  the  ground 
everywhere  covered  with  three  to  four  inches  of  snow,  and 
snow  still  falling.  By  noon  it  had  turned  to  rain,  and  rain 
has  been  falling  ever  since,  and  it  is  now,  6  p.m.,  a  poor 
prospect  for  to-morrow ;  we  shall  have  to  keep  the  house,  I 
am  afraid.  All  this  blessed  day  I  have  been  employed  in 
buying  curios.  Early  this  morning  half-a-dozen  women 
made  their  appearance  in  our  rooms,  each  with  a  large  box 
of  curios  strapped  to  her  back,  and  they  have  been  here  all 
day,  employed  first  in  selling,  and  next  in  packing  up  for  me 
the  purchases  I  had  made  from  them,  for  carriage  to  Yoko- 
hama. Out  of  wood,  bamboo,  and  straw,  these  Japanese 
manufacture  very  pretty  things.  The  business  finished,  all 
the  women  got  into  a  hot  bath,  and  in  this  state  made  no 
objection  whatever  to  receiving  visitors.  A  regular  chow- 
chow  ended  up  the  day^s  work,  and  they  then  took  their 
leave. 


5i6  CATEMBA—PASS  OF  OTOME-TONGE. 

Vith. — ^At  10  A.1I.  yesterday  we  started  to  walk  to  Gatemba. 
The  road  was  hard  and  slippery  in  the  shade,  and  sloppy  in 
the  sun,  and  on  the  west  side  of  the  pass  of  Otome-Tonge 
there  was  a  covering  of  five  to  six  inches  of  snow  all  the  way 
down.  The  village  of  Singnofee,  which  we  passed  through, 
is  about  2000  feet  above  the  sea,  and  the  pass  of  Otome- 
Tonge,  which  we  reached  about  2  p.m.,  my  aneroid  made 
3250  feet  The  day  was  fine  and  the  atmosphere  clear,  so 
that  we  had  from  the  top  of  the  pass,  looking  over  some 
miles  of  plain,  a  glorious  view  of  Fusiyama,  covered  with 
snow  to  the  very  base ;  indeed,  the  snow  extended  all  over  the 
plain  which  lay  between  our  standing-point  and  the  holy 
mountaia.  From  the  pass  no  one  would  guess  Fusiyama  to 
be  nearly  five  times  the  height  of  the  pass  itself;  we  seemed 
pretty  nearly  on  a  level  with  the  top  of  it  as  we  ate  our 
luncheon  and  gazed  upon  it  Its  height,  however,  is  about 
14,000  feet,  though  there  is  great  differences  between  the 
different  measurements  made  of  it  At  4.30  p.m.  we  reached 
Gkitemba,  a  large  village,  and  there,  in  a  comfortable  tea* 
house,  got  rid  of  our  wet  socks  and  our  well-soaked  boots, 
through  which  the  snow-water  easily  found  its  way.  At  ten 
this  morning  we  left  Gatemba,  and  at  5  p.m.  were  again 
comfortably  located  at  Meanosheta. 

20M,  AcUmarrcL — Early  this  morning  we  were  afoot, 
for  we  had  something  to  see  in  the  neighbourhood 
before  we  started  on  our  return  journey — a  water&ll 
hidden  in  a  deep  and  narrow  gorge,  within  a  mile  of 
the  tea-house  at  Meanosheta,  and  still  not  often  visited; 
for  besides  being  hidden,  and  never  hit  upon  unless 
searched  for,  the  scramble  necessary  to  get  down  to  it 
is  so  difficult,  that  many  might  not  like  to  undertake  it 
My  companion,  however,  was  a  born  photographist,  and 
had  hunted  up  this  gorge  on  a  previous  visit  to  the  district 
The  gorge  itself  is  not  more  than  forty  yards  wide,  and  on 
one  side  of  it  the  hill  is  about  the  same  height  To  the  water^s 
edge  it  is  covered  with  trees  and  shrubs.  The  &11  starts 
from  the  commencement  of  the  gorge,  and  the  water,  a  for- 
midable portion  of  it,  tumbles  down  a  vertical  cliff,  perhaps 
fifty  feet  high,  broken  in  its  fall  by  one  large  boulder  stick- 
ing out   about   half  way  down.     The  water   forms  a  fine 


MEANOSHETA  TO  ADA  WARE  A,  517 

bathing-pool  at  the  bottom  of  the  fall,  and  then  rushes  away 
in  a  zigzag  direction  for  a  hundred  yards  over  and  among 
large  boulders,  and  then  forms  another  fall,  not  so  high  and 
much  less  picturesque.  The  picture  viewed  from  the  bottom 
is  very  pretty.  Where  the  water  starts  from,  a  hot  mineral- 
spring  rises  up,  the  water  from  which  is  brought  down  by 
the  side  of  the  fall,  and  conducted  in  bamboo  pipes  to  the 
numerous  baths  in  the  neighbourhood.  The  temperature  of 
this  spring  close  to  the  fall  is  167^  The  scene  is  quite 
fairylike  about  this  spot,  even  now  in  winter ;  in  summer  its 
beauty  must  be  greatly  increased.  Soon  after  we  had  re- 
gained our  tea-house,  visiting  a  considerable  Buddhist 
temple  on  our  way  down  the  hill,  we  settled  up  our  score 
with  drunken  Doria  and  his  wife,  and  after  receiving  a  suc- 
cession of  salaams  and  prostrations  from  the  whole  household, 
all  of  whom  had  done  their  best  to  make  us  comfortable  dur- 
ing our  visit,  we  started  down  the  valley  on  foot  for  this  place. 
The  whole  eight  miles  intervening  between  Meanosheta 
and  Adawarra,  the  path  leads  down  a  narrow  valley  or  wide 
gorge,  of  which  every  available  bit  of  ground  is  under  cultiva- 
tion. The  rice  crop  is  all  gathered  in,  but  griin  and  green 
crops  cover  the  ground,  and  not  a  single  weed  is  seen  among 
them ;  it  wonld  seem  that  the  constant  hand-hoeing  to  which 
these  crops  are  subjected  (for  everything  is  sown  in  drills 
continuous,or  in  little  bunches), has  completelyand  thoroughly 
killed  all  weeds,  for  not  a  single  one  is  seen  even  on  ground 
off  which  the  crop  may  have  been  gathered  for  more  than  a 
month.  Snug  villages  are  met  with  all  along  the  valley, 
and  tea-houses  with  mineral  baths  attached.  We  busied 
ourselves  as  we  came  along  gathering  seeds,  now  quite  ripe, 
principally  from  the  cryptomeria,  which  line  the  whole  route, 
more  or  less,  and  from  which  we  shook  down  some  fine  ripe 
seed.  Aa  we  neared  Adawarra^  the  valley  widened  out,  and 
the  river  also,  which  occasionally  in  the  spring,  when  the 
snow  on  and  about  Fusiyama  is  melting,  does  considerable 
damage.  Breakwaters  are  formed  of  beach  stones,  kept 
together  in  long  rolls  by  a  network  of  bamboo,  to  confine 
the  water  in  its  proper  channel  The  Tocaido  comes  up  this 
valley  from  Adawarra  for  about  three  miles,  and  crosses  the 
river  over  a  bridge,  and  is  thence  continued  towards  Hatta 


5i8  TOCAIDO, 

and  Hakoni  northwards  over  hillj  ground.  It  is  the 
fashion  to  write  of  the  roads  generally  in  Japan  as  if  they 
were  wonderful  specimens  of  macadamising;  and  of  the 
Tocaido  in  particular,  as  offering  a  transit  right  through  the 
country  from  one  end  to  the  other,  such  as  is  possessed  by 
no  other  country  in  the  world  As  for  the  macadamised 
roads  in  Japan,  I  confess  I  have  never  met  with  them,  nor 
any  attempt  at  macadamising,  unless  in  the  settlement  of 
Yokohama,  where  the  streets  have  been  macadamised  by 
foreigners,  and  some  attempt  may  be  seen  at  the  process  in 
Yeddo,  also  the  result  of  foreign  souooir  /aire.  Everywhere 
that  I  have  travelled  on  the  Tocaido,  the  level  part  of  the 
road  is  kept  in  some  sort  of  order  by  a  watercourse  on  each 
side,  and  in  dry  weather  it  is  easily  kept  passable,  for  the 
soil  everywhere  is  light  and  porous,  but  not  at  the  com- 
mencement of  winter ;  in  these  flat  parts  it  is  full  of  ratSy 
and  either  in  walking  or  riding  in  a  ginricksha  considerable 
care  is  required  to  prevent  coming  to  grief.  The  hilly  or  slop- 
ing parts  of  the  Tocaido  are  roughly  paved  with  large  stones 
of  all  shapes,  and  is  no  doubt  a  great  improvement  on  a 
deeply  rutted  road,  which  these  slopes  would  be  were  it  not 
for  this  rough  pavement,  in  breadth  from  twelve  to  twenty 
feet  all  through,  and  bordered  for  the  most  part  by  old 
trees,  principally  pines  and  cryptomeria.  The  middle  or 
centre  of  Japan — of  the  principal  island,  Niphon,  at  any 
rate — is  a  continuous  mountainous  line,  and  the  Tocaido  or 
main  line  of  road  runs  along  between  this  mountainous  line 
and  the  south-eastern  shore,  sometimes  coming  down  on  to 
the  water-side,  and  again  extending  somewhat  in  among  the 
low  hills ;  and  I  have  found,  the  moment  you  leave  the 
Tocaido  on  either  side,  you  meet  with  a  network  of  narrow 
paths,  traversable  by  a  horse,  leading  to  the  villages,  which 
line  the  seashore  on  one  side  (fishing  villages),  or  are  em- 
bedded among  the  mountains  on  the  other  side,  and  these 
paths  in  winter  must  often  be  pretty  nearly  impassable, 
though  during  the  greater  portion  of  the  year  they  offer,  for 
the  most  part,  pleasant  travelling  through  forests  of  bamboo, 
long  gfass,  or  shrubs.  As  for  macadamising,  there  is  nowhere 
a  sign  of  it  where  I  have  journeyed.  The  fact  is,  the  soil 
everywhere  is  volcanic,  light,  and  porous,  and,  therefore,  the 


ADAWARRA.  519 

roads  are  comparatively  easily  kept  in  a  passable  state  for 
foot-passengers  and  horsemen ;  for  until  now,  that  the 
ginricksha  has  been  invented,  wheeled  vehicles  were  unknown 
in  Japan,  and  the  ginricksha  is  entirely  confined  to  the 
towns,  and  to  certain  parts  only  of  the  Tocaido.  It  was 
4  P.M.  before  we  reached  the  tea-house  at  Adawarra,  so  inter- 
rupted was  our  progress  by  what  we  saw  en  route^  and  by 
our  frequent  stoppages  to  gather  the  falling  and  now  ripe 
seeds.  At  Adawarra  we  had  comfortable  quarters  for  the 
night,  though  the  unfurnished  hybrid  house  attached  to  the 
tea-house,  ycleped  a  hotel  for  foreigners,  was  quite  as  cold, 
if  not  colder,  than  the  paper  Japanese  houses.  After  break- 
fast, we  left  our  lodging  with  a  guide  to  visit  a  Daimio's 
stronghold  or  castle,  attached,  one  might  say,  to  this  large 
village  or  town  of  Adawarra.  A  few  minutes'  walk  brought  us 
to  the  entrance  of  the  castle,  the  walls  of  which  are  every- 
where some  fifteen  or  twenty  feet  high,  and* some  fifteen  feet 
thick,  all  of  granite,  and  surrounded  by  two  extensive 
moats,  now  used  for  growing  paddy.  In  a  shed  at  the  entrance 
we  saw  some  twenty  pieces  of  rifled  field-artillery,  and  these 
ar^  the  only  signs  of  armament  we  saw.  The  fortress  covers 
a  large  extent  of  ground,  many  hundreds  of  acres,  I  should 
say.  We  travelled  on  through  windings  and  turnings  until 
we  reached  the  highest  point,  which  seemed  to  stand  in  the 
centre  of  the  whole  structure ;  arrived  at  its  base,  we  mounted 
up  to  it  by  some  very  broad  stone  steps.  It  is  a  massive 
piece  of  stonework,  pretty  nearly  solid,  measuring  twenty- 
three  by  twenty-one  yards  or  thereabouts.  It  overlooks  not 
only  the  whole  castle,  but  the  country  far  and  near,  the  fore- 
ground covered  with  a  variety  of  fine  large  trees,  and  in 
the  background  on  the  land  side  affording  a  noble  view  of 
the  holy  mountain^  and  a  long  ridge  of  lower  hills ;  and  on 
the  other  side,  overlooking  Adawarra  on  to  the  sea.  Upon 
this  square  piece  of  masonry  once  stood  the  Daimio's  paper 
house ;  marks  of  the  slight  foundation  upon  which  it  was 
raised,  wooden  piles,  still  remain^  and  show  that  a  wide 
corridor  surrounded  the  building  and  reached  to  the  edge 
of  the  platform.  Besides  these  signs,  not  a  vestige  of 
the  house  remained.  K  the  view  alone  from  it  were  coi^ 
sidered,  the  site  struck  me  as  one  of  the  most  desirable  for  a 


520  DAIMIOS  CASTLE, 

house  .1  had  ever  seen.  In  the  lower  part  of  the  enclosure 
Btill  stand  the  houses  formerly  occupied  by  the  principal 
jakoninsy  or  officers  of  the  Daimio,  and  twelve  large  store- 
houses, in  two  rows,  for  holding  his  stock  of  rice  and  other 
food  for  himself  and  for  his  retainers.  On  emerging  firom 
the  fortress,  the  gates  of  which  barring  the  several  entrances 
have  already  disappeared,  we  wandered  for  three  hours  amon; 
orange  groves,  grain  plots,  and  streets  of  pretty  cottages 
(some  miles  of  them),  all  even  now  neatly  kept,  and  withont 
exception  with  gardens  attached,  and  neatly  trimmed  crjrpto- 
meria  or  cypress  hedges  along  the  street  side.  These  irere 
the  habitations  of  the  Daimio's  retainers,  of  which  he  mast 
have  had  several  thousands,  all  two-sworded.men,  the  terror 
of  the  quiet  villager  and  farmer  of  Japan  wherever  they  made 
their  appearance — the  swashbucklers  of  the  nineteenth  cen- 
tury. At  one  pretty  little  cottage  ensconced  in  a  grove  of  orange 
and  lemon  trees,  and  surrounded  by  some  patches  of  wheAt 
and  green  crops  under  beautiful  cultivation,  the  good  woman, 
with  the  everlasting  baby  lashed  to  her  back,  was  emplojed 
outside.  We  patted  the  baby  and  made  much  of  it,  and  the 
result  was,  the  good  housewife,  who  seemed  to  be  quite  alone 
with  the  baby,  went  indoors  and  produced  a  basket  of  oranges, 
which  she  insisted  upon  our  accepting,  stating  they  were 
better  than  any  we  saw  upon  the  trees  around  us,  and  doubt- 
less they  were  so,  for  they  were  very  good.  It  was  with  diffi- 
culty we  induced  her  to  accept  payment  for  the  fruit,  and 
only  succeeded  by  thrusting  the  note  into  the  paw  of  the 
baby,  to  be  applied  to  the  baby's  own  particular  use.  We 
were  three  hours  wandering  about  the  estate,  and  only  reached 
our  hotel  at  noon.  We  had  now  a  walk  of  nearly  twenty 
miles  before  us  to  Fugisawa,  the  village  at  which  we  had 
determined  to  pass  the  night  The  whole  distance,  prettj 
nearly,  leads  through  villages ;  and  of  course  we  met  with 
great  interruption,  stopping  at  curio-shops,  and  sometimes 
making  purchases,  looking  into  cottages  where  the  loom  was 
at  work,  or  the  carding  or  reeling  of  cotton  was  going 
on,  or  watching  the  flail  threshing  paddy,  always  done  bj 
women,  and  the  working  of  a  very  simple  but  inefficient 
winnowing  machine,  or  the  blowing  out  of  the  dust  from 
paddy,  by  a  woman  working  a  pair  of  flappers  or  wings,  whick 


FUGISAWA,  521 

prodaced  a  carrent  of  air,  brought  to  bear  on  the  paddy  as 
it  was  thrown  into  the  air  by  another  woman  at  work  with  a 
shoveL  These  things,  and  a  handred  others,  delayed  as  very 
much,  and  at  4.30  we  still  found  ourselves  five  ree  (12^ 
miles)  distant  from  Fugisawa;  we  determined  therefore  to  hire 
giurickshas,  three  of  them  for  4s.  6d.  (four  and  a  half  boos), 
so  away  we  went  at  the  rate  of  about  five  miles  an  hour. 
The  drivers  gauged  our  weight  before  starting,  and  drew  lots 
for  choice.  I  was  considered  the  heaviest  of  the  lot,  and  my 
boy  the  next  heaviest,  so  that  half  way  we  changed  into  fresh 
ginrickshas,  whilst  Mr  G.  was  considered  light  enough  to  be 
carried  the  whole  way  without  change.  It  soon  got  dark, 
and  very  cold  soon  after  we  began  to  ride  ;  the  road  too  was 
full  of  ruts,  and  I  was  heartily  glad  when,  at  7.30  p.m.,  our  gin- 
rickshas turned  into  the  tea-house  at  Fugisawa.  Here  the 
good  women  soon  busied  themselves  to  warm  the  rooms  they 
bad  assigned  to  us.  The  brazier  answers  the  purpose,  and 
two  or  three  of  them  filled  with  well-burnt  charcoal  soon 
warm  a  small  and  low  room.  A  cup  of  tea  also  helped,  and 
by  the  time  we  had  had  our  dinner  we  felt  all  right  again. 
Our  coolies  with  the  luggage  were  not  long  in  arriving,  bring- 
ing with  them  our  provisions,  and  a  portion  of  our  bed-gear. 
2\8t. — We  slept  soundly  last  night,  and  were  up  and  at 
our  breakfast  by  nine  o'clock,  and  we  had  hardly  left  the  tea- 
house on  our  way  to  Yokohama  (about  twelve  to  thirteen 
miles),  when  we  ran  against  Mrs  G.  coming  in  a  carriage 
for  a  drive  to  meet  her  husband.  This  put  an  end  to  our  pedes- 
trianism ;  we  proceeded  at  once  to  a  place  some  five  or  six 
miles  from  Yokohama,  where  we  stopped  to  lunch ;  and  at 
4  P.M.  we  had  arrived  at  our  destination.  Before  leaving 
Fugisawa  we  visited  a  Buddhist  temple,  one  of  the  hand- 
somest and  best-kept  temples  in  Japan.  At  the  entrance 
of  the  temple,  at  the  receipt  of  custom,  sat  half-a-dozen  Bud- 
dhist priests,  shorn  of  every  hair,  well-fed,  clean-looking  fel- 
lows, all  young,  dressed  in  light  grey  cloaks.  A  paper  boo 
(Is.)  thrust  into  the  "  poor-box,"  a  long  chest  with  a  long 
slit  in  the  cover,  placed  us  upon  good  terms  with  the  apparent 
chief  among  the  priests,  a  short  very  fat  man  with  a  smiling 
countenance,  and  very  energetic.  He  insisted  upon  our  going 
over  the  apartments  attached  to  the  temple,  which  both  the 


522  A   TEMPLE. 

Tycoon  and  the  Mikado  had  usaally  made  their  resting-places  in 
passing  through  Fugisawa.    These  apartments  are  very  exten- 
sive, very  clean,   and  highly  ornamented  in   the  Japanese 
style.     The  thick  matting  on  the  floor  was  excruciatingly  fine 
and  softy  and  it  cost  us  some  compunction  of  conscience  to 
walk  over  it  with  our  somewhat  dirty  boots  on  ;  indeed,  we  had  . 
objected  to  go  over  these  apartments  on  account  of  taking  off 
laced-up  boots,  perhaps  because  we  had  holes  in  our  stock- 
ings also,  but  the  little  fat  priest  overruled  all  our  objections, 
and  would  show  us  through  the  sumptuous  apartments  even 
with  our  dirty  boots  on.  The  paper  boo  had  produced  a  magical 
effect  upon  our  fat  friend.     I  may  remark  here,  that  although 
there  have  been  upwards  of  forty-five  millions  of  dollars  of 
gold  and  silver  money  coined  in  Japan  in  two  years,  in  the 
shape  of  twenty,  ten,  five,  two,  and  one  dollar  pieces,  and 
one  dollar,  half-a-dollar,  fifty,  twenty,  and  ten  cent  pieces 
in  silver,  there  is  hardly  a  single  piepe  of  this  metallic  cur- 
rency to  be  met  with  in  circulation  in  Yeddo  or  the  immediate 
i^eighbourhood ;  the  whole  is  hoarded  by  the  Japanese,  and 
paper  does  the  work  of  a  circulating  medium  in  notes  down 
to  a  quarter  of  a  boo  (3d.),  and  after  that  copper  and  iron 
coin  (tempos  and  cash)  for  the  smallest  transactions,  six- 
teen tempos   to  a  boo,  a  hundred  cash  to  a  tempo.    Bat 
to  return  to  the  temple  and  our  fat  friend ;  he  took  espe- 
cial care  to  show  us  the  kitchen,  verily  a  fine  large  apart- 
ment, clean,  and  well  supplied  with  all  Japanese  culinary  ves- 
sels.    My  friend  bowed  very  low  to  the  cook  in  the  kitchen, 
as  he  did,  indeed,  to  all  with  whom  we  came  in  contact  in 
passing  through  the  apartments.     The  Japanese  are  a  very 
ceremonious  and  polite  people.     The  temple  itself  was  gorge- 
ously fitted  up  with  more  than  the  usual  number  of  gilded  gods. 
On  the  raised  platform  in  front  of  the  temple  stood  two  large 
bronze  lamps,  and  several  large  lotus-shaped  bronze  vessels 
or  tanks  filled  with  water.     A  handsome  pagoda-shaped  roof 
covered  a  separate  apartment,  holding  a  very  fine  bell,  which 
we  took  the  liberty  of  striking,  though  very  gently,  with  the 
long,  well-poised  piece  of  timber,  slung  by  two  chains,  and 
placed  in  a  position  to  serve  in  place  of  our  tongue  or  clapper, 
no  Japanese  bell  being  made  with  a  clapper.     Behind  the 
temple  are  extensive  gardens  and  pleasure  grounds.    There 


YOKOHAMA.  523 

many  priests  aboat  this  temple,  all  youDg  and  good- 
ng ;  doubtless  they  have  a  very  easy  life  of  it.  The  road 
swards,  that  is,  between  Fngisawa  and  Yokohama,  was 
iry  bad  condition,  fall  of  ruts  and  holes,  which  made  it 
ssary  to  hold  on  tightly  by  the  sides  of  the  carriage  to 
3nt  being  pitched  out  headlong.     It  was  Sunday,  and  a 

bright  day,  so  the  road  was  thronged  with  parties,  prin- 
ly  foreigners,  in  carriages  and  on  horseback,  from  Yoko- 
I,  bent  on  amusing  themselves. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

Tokohmma  -To  Teddo  by  rail— Exhibition  of  articlM  Mnt  to  Yiemub— PotteiT— B«- 
fining  gold  and  Bilref— European  innovationi— A  new  calendar — Bnropean  drM 
— Railway  latiafactorily  managed— Teddo— Jutaneee  go  the  "whole  hog "— 
Babbit  mania— Amaiements—Honses  of  wood  and  paper— Fire-proof  ami 
godowni— A  temple  feait-day— Pay  and  pray— Mikado'i  lerie ;  all  in  Buopeti 
ooitame — ^Aaaxas— Sale  of  printed  morality— Nursery  gardens— Daimio'i  rM* 
dence,  now  a  college — ^Fate  of  the  Daimioe — Hosnital  and  School  of  IfedieiBi 
ones  a  Daimio's  harem— Dissecting-room— Headless  bodies  for  disssrHnn- 
Biuial-|^und  of  Tycoons- New  police— Sheba,  one  of  the  principal  temples— 
Execution  ground— Keeping  deities  awake — Oodsee,  composed  of  temples,  tsr 
houses,  duicing  saloons— vegetation  —  Theatre  —  Pillar-boxes  —  Post*offics- 
Steamer  to  Kobe— Tea-firing  described — Qypsum  and  Prussian  blue  for  maloBg 
green  tea— Japanese  tea  sent  to  America— Waterfalls— Sintoo  temjde — ^Prisiti 
do  all  the  praying — Bobbing  three  hundred  dollars,  death — Osaka— The  mint- 
Hoarding  coin — ^Praer  money — ^Assaying— Automaton  weighing-machine  — Fkeii 
castle  ia  JuMtn — ^Fagoda — Funeral — Execution  ground — ^Waxwork  exhibitioo— 
Dancing-girls- Kobe  wax-trees— Lacquer-trees-Exports — Tea-firing— Bamiag 
bodies — wMey  of  Lome  steamer — Bice— Ixdand  sea — Amoy— Hong-Kong- 
Biaoao — Kidnapping  coolies — Electrical  spiritualism-Saigon- Protestant  ssd 
Catholic  missionaries— Their  different  suooess— Singapore — Bound  for  GsUs. 

28M,  Yokohama^  Sunday, — The  aneroid  has  fallen  five- 
tenths  of  an  inch  since  the  day  before  yesterday,  and  it  is 
now  (9  A.M.)  blowing  hard  from  the  soatii,  and  a  fair  sprink- 
ling of  rain  falling.  This  is  the  only  bad  day  we  have  had  since 
my  return  from  the  country,  and  my  time  has  been  spent  in 
finishing  up  my  purchases,  and  in  wandering  about  Yoko- 
hama and  the  neighbourhood,  with  one  trip  to  Yeddo  by  rail, 
to  visit  the  exhibition  of  curios  and  other  articles  on  show 
for  a  couple  of  days,  before  being  packed  up  and  shipped  for 
Trieste  on  board  a  Messagerie  boat,  now  gone  up  to  Jeddo  to 
receive  them,  chartered  by  the  Government  for  the  purpose. 
It  is  purely  an  industrial  assortment  of  articles  manufactured 
in  Japan  in  the  present  day,  also  of  the  agricultural  and 
mineral  products ;  of  miniature  Japanese  town  and  farm- 
houses, the  latter  very  complete,  and  of  a  few  animals  and 
birds.  Among  the  former,  a  woolly  horse,  and  a  dog  bom  (I 
suppose)  with  only  three  legs,  a  miserable-looking  creature 
enough.  I  am  told  the  Government  will  also  send  a  foll- 
sized  tea-house  to  be  erected  within  the  grounds  of  the  exhi- 


INNO  VA  TIONS.  5  2  5 

bition  at  Vienna,  with  a  proper  accompaniment  of  men  and 
girls. 

I  have  yisited  a  pottery,  and  an  establishment  for  refining 
gold  and  silver,  both  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  settle- 
ment Neither  of  them  presented  to  me  anything  very  striking 
in  their  mode  of  work ;  all  their  appliances  seemed  rough  and 
ready-like,  compared  with  the  results.  The  Government  seem 
determined  on  innovations.  Their  calendar  is  about  to  be 
assimilated  to  that  in  use  in  England,  France,  and  some  other 
European  countries.  The  people  have  been  recommended  by 
public  notice  not  to  shave  their  crowns,  but  to  let  their  hair 
grow  and  wear  hats.  The  consequence  has  been  a  very  large 
business  in  hats  lately,  bell-toppers,  wide-awakes^  &c.,  &c.  All 
civil  employes  are  ordered  to  dress  a  la  European^  and  there 
is  now  pasted  up  on  a  board  outside  a  public  office  here 
patterns  of  coats,  trousers,  waistcoats,  and  hats  to  be  worn  at 
a  lev6e  to  be  held  at  Teddo  in  the  palace  of  the  Mikado  on 
Ist  January.  Great  numbers  of  civilians  of  all  classes  already 
dress  in  European  costume,  but  none  of  the  women,  I  think ; 
and  the  troops,  cavalry  and  infantry,  have  adopted  the  French 
uniform,  and  really  very  monkey-like  they  look,  one  and  all 
of  them ;  the  police,  too,  wear  European  clothes,  and  are  armed 
with  a  baton  or  short  constable's  staff.  These  latter,  I  am  told, 
have  been  formed  out  of  the  retainers  of  the  feudal  lords, 
now  divested  of  all  political  power — the  two-sworded  gentle-- 
men-swashbucklers  who  before  the  revolution  were  such  a 
dangerous  class  of  society.  Our  holidays  are  to  be  the 
Japanese  holidays  for  the  future.  Their  railway  manage- 
ment— I  mean,  as  to  stationmasters,  guards,  porters,  &c.,  &a, 
on  the  one  line  yet  open — ^is  like  our  own,  only  that  it  is  much 
more  efficient  than  many  of  ours.  The  line  is  single,  and 
unfortunately  the  rails  have  been  placed  in  the  centre  of  the 
roadway ;  this  makes  it  awkward  for  laying  down  a  second 
line,  which  will  be  required  immediately.  The  receipts  are 
about  8000  dollars  a  week  on  this  eighteen-mile  single  line, 
all  froifi  passengers,  for  they  are  not  yet  prepared  to  carry 
goods.  The  fares  are,  first-class,  7s. ;  second,  3s.  6d. ;  third, 
Is.  6d.,  to  or  from  Teddo. 

January  lat^  1873,  Yeddo. — I  came  here  this  morning  with 
the  intention  of  doing  this  city  and  the  environs.  Flying  visits 


f 


526  RABBITS, 

do  not  allow  one  time  to  see  satisfactorily,  so  I  have  made  up 
my  mind  to  stay  here  a  week.    To-day  I  have  walked  through  a 
good  two  miles  in  the  heart  of  the  city,  and  upon  the  map  it 
looks  like  but  a  small  part  of  the  whole.     I  first  visited  a 
very  pretty  place,  the  residence  of  the   Spanish    Consul, 
formerly  belonging  to  a  Daimio.    It  covers,  perhaps,  half-a- 
dozen   acres ;  in  the   centre  is   a   sheet  of  water,  perhaps 
two  acres,  and  around  it  a  number  of  mounds  have  been 
raised  with  the  earth  dug  out  to  make  the  pond,  all  planted, 
and  not  presenting  a  bad  imitation  of  mother  Nature  herself. 
At  one  end,  overlooking  the  lake,  is  the  Consul's  house,  a 
cottage  edifice  with  glass  windows.    The  tout  ensemble  is  a 
bijou.    After   tiffin  I  visited  a  temple ;  it  was  a  fSte-day. 
Hundreds  of  people  were  throwing  iron  cash  into  the  poor- 
boxes  and  saying  their  prayers,  whilst  the  priests  inside  were 
going  through  all  the  vagaries  of  a  Boman  Catholic  service. 
There  was  a  constant  coming  and  going  of  devotees,  and  they 
were  to  all  appearance  very  earnest  in  their  prayers.    No 
doubt  at  all  they  believed  in  their  efficacy,  or  they  would 
not  have  been  so  liberal  with  their  iron  cash.     It  has  been 
remarked,  that  in  taking  up  or  going  in  for  anything  new, 
the  Japanese  go  "  the  whole  hog."    Hats,  wide-awakes  princi-  ^ 
pally,  have  lately  been  sold  to  an  immense  extent     Yesterday 
there  were  a  number  of  competitors  for  twenty-two  rabbits, 
which  had  been  brought  over  from  San  Francisco  by  the 
American  steamer,  and  cost  probably  Is.  6d.  each  in  the  San 
Francisco  market    They  found  a  purchaser  yesterday  for 
1400  dollars,  and  after  the  sale  they  were  said  to  be  worth  2000 
dollars,  one  large  rabbit  alone  being  valued  at  500  dollars. 
(I  have  since  learnt  the  rabbits  changed  hands  again  at  2000 
dollars.)    In  their  amusements,  too,  the  Japanese  are  re- 
markable.   To-day  in  the  streets,  from  end  to  end,  ay  I  men 
and  women  too,  all  are  playing  at  battledore  and  shuttle-cock, 
and  in  flying  kites ;  there  must  have  been  many  thousands 
thus  employed,  all  more  or  less  in  their  holiday  clothes,  of 
many  and  very  bright  colours. .  I  cannot  say  much  for  the  build- 
ings ;  with  the  exception  of  the  fire-proof  mud  godowns,  of 
which  there  are  many  in  every  street,  the  houses  are  of  the 
most  flimsy  kind,  all  of  wood,  with  paper  sliding  partitions, 
and  not  many  of  them  of  two  stories.     In  appearance  they 


A  SAX  AS.  527 

are  not  much  better  than  booths  in.afairin  an  English 
country  town.  Praise  has  been  lavished  on  the  Japanese  for 
their  macadamised  roads.  The  streets  I  have  passed  through 
to-day  are  fnll  of  ruts,  and  the  only  sign  of  macadamising 
was  an  occasional  stone  sticking  np  through  the  mud.  There 
is  no  pavement  anywhere,  though  many  of  the  streets  are 
from  twenty  to  thirty  feet  wide.  A  wooden  bridge  I  crossed, 
which  spans  the  river  that  runs  through  the  city,  must  be 
120  yards  long,  and  such  a  tramping  as  there  was !  A  throng 
of  people,  nine -tenths  of  them  wearing  thick  wooden 
clogs,  and  the  other  tenth  straw-shoes.  They  tell  me  that 
to-day  the  Government  has  commenced  laying  on  new  taxes : 
a  shooting  license  of  five  dollars ;  a  tax  of  two  and  a  half 
dollars  on  covered  boats ;  and  a  tax  on  itinerant  musicians. 
To-day  the  Mikado  has  held  a  grand  lev^e  of  officials,  all 
dressed  in  European  costume  I 

2cL — Visited  Asaxas  this  morning.  To  get  there  from  the 
hotel  took  me  pretty  nearly  an  hour  in  a  ginricksha,  so  it 
most  be  a  good  four  miles,  through  densely  populated  streets 
the  whole  way.  In  dimensions  the  principal  temple  is  a 
monster ;  the  largest  temple  in  Teddo,  or  perhaps  in  Japan. 
There  are  a  dozen  auxiliary  temples  around  it,  and  to-day 
they  were  all  doing  a  thriving  business.  Thousands  of  people 
were  flocking  to  it,  saying  their  prayers,  and  pitching  their 
cash  into  the  gaping  chests  placed  in  every  direction  for  the 
accommodation  of  the  devout  and  charitable.  The  prayer  is 
a  very  short  one ;  half  a  minute  suffices.  Some  cash  is  thrown 
into  one  of  the  monster  poor-boxes ;  the  donor  kneels  down, 
and  raising  his  clasped  hands  before  him  in  silence,  says 
the  shortest  of  prayers.  He  then  claps  his  hands  and 
retires,  as  likely  as  not,  to  get  drunk.  At  the  small  temple 
where  there  are  but  few  people,  the  devotee  usually  pulls  a 
rope  which  hangs  down  in  front  of  the  entrance,  and  tolls  a 
small  bell  to  wake  up  the  god.  At  the  principal  temple  this 
is  not  considered  necessary,  there  being  so  many  and  frequent 
calls  on  him  that  it  is  properly  considered  the  god  is  always 
awake.  This  temple  is  well  crammed  with  gods  of  all  sizes, 
and  doubtless  of  every  degree  of  power ;  pictures  of  all  sorts — 
among  others,  I  observed  one  of  a  large  American  steamer — 
gifts  from  the  devout ;  lauterus  without  number,  and  orna- 


528  TEMPLE  OF  ASAXAS. 

mentation  of  a  most  varied  character ;  there  is  a  brisk  sale 
of  small  religions  paintings  and  scraps  of  printed  morality 
in  Tarions  forms  being  carried  on  by  several  priests,  whilst 
others  are  employed  before  the  principal  altar,  going  through 
the  required  religions  service,  to  give  efficacy  to  the  thousands 
of  prayers  being  offered  np,  and  invariably  accompanied  by 
a  donation.  One  of  the  temples  contained  six  furions-look- 
ing  figures,  painted  green,  blue,  and  black,  each  stamping  and 
crushingan  unfortunate  and  powerless  individual  under  his  feet 
One  of  them  was  evidently  Michael  the  Archangel  himself, 
who,  with  uplifted  sword,  was  about  to  decapitate  Old  Nick 
himself;  or,  if  it  were  not  Michael,  it  was  some  Buddhist  saint 
corresponding  to  our  Christian  saint  of  that  name.  Beside 
these  many  temples  at  Asaxas,  there  was  a  theatre  in  full 
swing ;  shops  in  which  'singing  and  other  birds  were  sold, 
and  monkeys  also.  Of  these  latter,  there  were  a  couple  of  the 
red-faced  tailless  monkeys  of  Japan,  which  were  highly  amus- 
ing. One  tumbled  half-a-dosen  somersaults  whenever  he  saw  a 
prospect  of  getting  something  to  eat;  whilst  the  other,  his  com- 
panion, with  the  same  provocation,  placed  his  hands  together 
and  made  the  giver  a  very  solemn  salaam.  From  the  tomfoolery 
going  on  in  the  temples,  I  turned  for  a  stroll  in  the  nursery- 
gardens  close  to  the  temples.  They  contained  a  variety  of 
dwarfed  plants,  curiously  trained,  and  growing  very  healthily. 
In  one  of  these  nurseries  I  bought  a  large  and  handsome 
turned  ball,  from  what  must  have  been  a  large  mass  of 
pudding-stone.  In  the  same  nursery,  three  years  ago,  I 
picked  up  a  ball  of  black  touchstone,  used  by  jewellers  for 
trying  the  quality  of  gold.  On  the  whole  route  through 
the  city  to-day  and  yesterday,  at  every  door  and  every  win- 
dow were  tied  up  branches  of  the  fir-tree,  docketed  with  the 
name  of  the  donor  as  giving  something  to  his  favourite  god. 
A  branch  of  a  fir-tree,  to  be  sure,  was  not  much  to  give,  but 
doubtless  it  would  be  equally  efficacious,  and  as  much  ap- 
preciated, as  more  valuable  offerings.  The  god  would  be 
likely  to  consider  the  one  as  much  as  the  other.  Returned 
from  Asaxas,  I  went  by  the  invitation  of  M.  Francois,  a 
French  officer,  one  of  the  professors  in  the  Military  CioUege, 
to  look  over  the  residence  and  grounds  of  the  Daimio 
(Hamounno)  now  turned  into  a  military  college.     The  resi* 


A  DAIMIO'S  CASTLE.  529 

dence  of  the  Daimio  Btande  in  the  centre  of  the  grounds,  a 
spacious  building  of  one  story,  with  a  mile  or  two  of  pas- 
sages and  corridors.  The  French  military  teachers,  of  whom 
there  are  sixteen  in  the  college,  have  made  the  Daimio's 
castle  a  very  comfortable  residence.  The  original  enclosure, 
now  divided  and  subdivided,  must  cover  twenty  acres,  around 
which  stood  the  barracks  for  the  retaiuers,  which  used  to 
consist  of  from  four  to  five  thousand  men.  All  these  barracks, 
from  having  been  neglected,  are  now  tumbling  to  pieces. 
The  entrance  to  this  establishment  is  through  a  huge  and  im- 
posing portal  of  great  strength.  A  wall  of  sexagonal  stones, 
beautifully  fitted  into  each  other,  surrounds,  in  whole  or  in 
part  (I  am  not  sure  which),  the  whole  enclosure.  These  stones 
are  so  fitted  into  each  other  that,  in  many  cases,  it  would 
be  impossible  to  insert  the  edge  of  the  blade  of  a  penknife. 
No  mortar  is  used  in  building  the  walls.  Alas  I  for  the  poor 
Daimios,  of  whom  there  were  600  in  Japan ;  their  residences, 
with  the  exception  of  those  that  have  been  utilised  by  the 
Gk)vernmenty  are  now  howling  wildernesses.  Never  was  a 
powerful  feudal  system  so  quickly,  and,  I  believe,  so  com- 
pletely, destroyed  as  this  of  Japan  has  been.  In  return  for 
all  that  has  been  taken  from  them — their  entire  property — the 
existing  Gbvernment,  who  has  been  victorious  in  the  fight, 
allows  the  Daimios  an  amount  annually  equal  to  10  per  cent, 
of  their  former  revenue,  and  are  now  discussing  whether  it 
will  not  be  better  to  capitalise  this  annuity,  and  get  rid  of 
the  Daimios  once  for  all  by  paying  then!  a  round  sum  down. 
What  the  result  of  this  proposed  measure  may  be  seems 
doubtful.  From  my  visit  to  M.  Francois  I  went  to  the  hill 
overlooking  Teddo.  This  is  a  hill  ascended  by  111  stone 
steps,  and  also  by  98  steps  (the  two  flights  of  steps  being 
close  together),  which  overlooks  Teddo,  and  in  clear  weather 
affords  a  fine  view  of  the  city.  On  the  top  of  this  hill  are 
numerous  tea-houses,  some  small  temples,  and  a  large  well- 
filled  cemetery.  The  Japanese  bury  their  dead  huddled  up 
into  as  small  a  compass  as  possible,  so  that  the  gravestones 
stand  very  thickly  together. 

3^. — To-day,  in  company  with  a  young  German  physician 
just  arrived  in  Teddo,  and  belonging  to  the  Government  School 
of  Medicine  established  at  Uino,  I  visited  first  the  public 

2l 


530  A  PUBLIC  HOSPITAL, 

hospital,  and  afterwards  Uino  itself.  At  the  public  hospital 
is  located  the  school  of  medicine,  bnt  as  this  is  holiday-time, 
there  were  no  students  in  attendance.  After  going  over  the 
very  large  building,  once  a  Daimio*s  harem  they  tell  me,  now 
turned  into  an  hospital  and  school,  my  friend  introduced  me 
into  the  dissecting-room,  in  which  were  laid  out,  on  as  many 
tables,  eleven  headless  bodies,  criminals  who  had  been  deca- 
pitated within  the  last  few  days  at  Teddo,  and  handed  over 
for  dissection  for  the  benefit  of  the  living;  and  although  I 
must  have  been  here  myself  during  these  executions,  I  bad 
never  heard  of  them.  It  would  seem,  in  fact,  that  people 
here  think  little  of  such  occurrences,  so  frequent  are  they. 
A  small  crime  is  punished  in  Japan  by  decapitation.  Long 
terms  of  imprisonment  are  unknown.  The  Government  pre- 
fers to  get  rid  of  a  criminal  at  once  to  incurring  the  expense 
attendant  on  long  periods  of  imprisonment  The  odour  in 
the  dissecting-room  was  not  at  all  pleasant,  so  I  did  not  stay 
there  long — long  enough,  however,  to  observe  that,  in  the 
migority  of  cases,  the  heads  had  not  been  artistically,  or  by 
a  clean  stroke,  severed  from  the  body :  the  cutting  was  very 
jagged.  In  an  adjoining  room  there  were  three  or  four 
skeletons,  which  seemed  well  put  together,  and  as  many 
anatomical  specimens.  The  nucleus  of  a  Natural  History 
museum  was  also  to  be  seen  there.  There  were  some  fifty 
patients  in  the  hospital,  all  lying  on  comfortable  beds,  the 
first,  I  should  think,  they  had  ever  lain  upon.  From  this 
establishment  we  went  on  to  Uino,  a  pretty  place  just  clear 
of  the  city.  The  grounds  about  it  are  well  timbered,  and  there 
are  two  or  three  temples  of  some  interest,  one  of  them  con- 
taining a  Bhudda  in  a  sitting  posture,  whose  head  is  eight 
feet  long.  In  the  burial-ground  of  the  Tycoons  each  body 
has  a  massive  granite  monument  over  it,  enclosed  within  a 
tile-cement  wall :  there  must  be  some  scores  of  these  tombs 
or  monuments.  There  are  also  some  isolated  ruins,  pro- 
bably of  temples.  Uino,  they  tell  me,  was  the  scene  of  a 
bloody  battle  in  the  late  revolution,  but  I  have  been  unable 
to  learn  anything  about  it.  It  is  about  five  miles  from  the 
hotel  at  Yeddo.  We  hired  ginrickshas  to  take  us  there,  and 
we  walked  back.  The  boys  and  girls  are  still  occupied  with 
battledore  and  shuttlecock,  and  in  dying  kites ;  and  though 


POLICE— SHEBA,  531 

the  streets  are  thronged  with  them,  as  there  are  hardly  any 
yehicles  drawn  by  horses  in  Yeddo,  and  very  few  horsemen 
in  the  streets,  these  children  are  bnt  a  slight  nnisance,  and 
remain  unmolested.  The  police  are  numerous,  and  some 
Irishman  must,  I  think,  have  had  something  to  say  in  arm- 
ing them,  for  they  carry  regular  shillelahs;  and  each  man 
has  a  piece  of  small  cord  stuck  in  his  girdle,  with  which 
to  tie  the  hands  or  legs  of  obstreperous  prisoners.  These 
Japanese  generally  are  yery  bandy-legged,  and  their  new 
dress,  made  by  native  tailors  cL  la  European^  makes  this 
peculiarity  the  more  apparent.  I  saw  a  squad  of  forty 
policemen  marching  through  the  streets  to*day,  and  I  don't 
think  two  out  of  the  whole  lot  could  have  stopped  a  pig, 
unless  it  were  one  of  our  prize  pigs  at  the  Christmas  shews. 
Besides  the  officials,  many  others  of  the  population  have 
assumed  the  European  costume,  and  such  clothes  as  they 
wear !  They  really  look  like  so  many  monkeys.  It  is  per- 
haps a  pity  these  people  should  be  abandoning  their  national 
costume,  which  certainly  suited  them  very  well,  whilst  the 
European  dress,  as  I  have  already  said,  turns  them  into  so 
many  monkeys. 

hih, — Yesterday  was  an  unpleasant  day;  it  rained  from 
early  morn  until  late  in  the  afternoon,  and  I  took  advantage 
of  it  to  read  <<  South  Sea-Bubbles,"  by  the  <^  Earl  and  the 
Doctor."  To-day,  after  breakfast,  I  walked  to  "  Sheba," 
where  there  is  one  of  the  finest  temples  of  Japan,  and  a 
number  of  satellite  temples  also.  Ooe  sees  at  Sheba,  apart 
from  the  grand  temple  under  a  roof  of  its  own,  a  highly 
decorated  monument  in  honour  of  one  of  the  Tycoons  and 
his  wife,  the  only  Tycoon  buried  there  (they  tell  me),  though 
there  are  a  thousand  small  broDze  pillars  in  the  adjoining 
grouDd  erected  to  keep  alive  the  memory  of  the  Tycoons, 
their  wives,  and  children,  whose  bodies  have  rotted  elsewhere 
far  from  Sheba.  There  are  also  many  funereal  monuments 
set  up  to  do  honour  to  men  of  note,  but  who  they  were  I 
could  not  learn.  I  walked  back  to  the  inn,  and,  after  tiffin, 
sallied  out  with  the  young  German  doctor  to  visit  the  execu* 
tion  ground,  which  had  supplied  the  eleven  headless  bodies  I 
saw  in  the  hospital  the  day  before  yesterday.  We  did  not 
succeed,  however,  in  gaining  admittance,  but  were  told  that 


532  TEMPLES— OODZEE. 

we  might  be  permitted  to  visit  it  if  we  made  a  written  appli- 
cation to  the  Governor.  It  was  too  late  to  conform  to  Uiis 
formality,  so  we  contented  ourselves  by  looking  at  the  out- 
side of  the  massive  wall,  whence  had  issued  so  many  thou- 
sands (I  daresay)  of  headless  bodies.  We  must  have  walked 
through  three  miles  of  crowded  streets  before  we  reached  the 
"  execution  ground,"  and  very  muddy  and  dirty  they  were 
after  the  rain  of  yesterday,  there  being  no  sign  anywhere  of 
the  much-vaunted  macadamising  of  Japan.  The  houses  form- 
ing these  three  miles  of  streets,  and  very  far  beyond,  were  all 
of  the  meanest  description  I  have  seen  in  Yeddo.  By  the  hy, 
at  the  temple  of  Sheba,  whilst  a  priest  did  duty  at  the  altar, 
two  men  were  employed  with  hammers  in  striking  an  anvil, 
or  something' similar,  for  the  sound  was  just  such  as  one  hears 
on  passing  a  blacksmith's  shop.  This  hammering,  I  thiuk, 
must  have  been  meant  to  keep  the  god  awake,  to  ensure  hifl 
giving  ear  to  the  prayers  of  the  few  devotees  who  were  pray- 
ing and  paying  whilst  I  was  there.  The  coloured  lanterne  iu 
these  temples  are  ornamental,  some  of  them  are  eight  or  ten 
feet  in  height,  and  round  in  proportion.  There  was  a  fine 
bell  near  the  temple,  hung  under  a  pagoda-roof,  ten  or  twelve 
feet  high,  and  five  feet  Across  the  mouth.  It  was  struck  by 
a  beam  fourteen  or  fifteen  feet  long,  and  eighteen  inches  in 
diameter,  slung  by  four  chains.  I  gently  touched  it;  the 
tone  was  very  fine. 

9^A,  Yokohama. — I  was  employed  on  the  6th  and  7th  in  visit- 
ing the  outlying  parts  of  Teddo  and  its  neighbourhood.  I  took 
a  walk  of  about  five  miles  by  the  river  over  the  great  northern 
road,  which  I  found  no  better  macadamised  than  the  southern 
part  of  the  Tocaido ;  it  was  full  of  ruts  and  mud.  My  walk 
ended  at  a  village  called  Oodzee,  entirely  composed  of  tem- 
ples, tea-houses,  dancing  saloons,  and  other  places  of  amuse- 
ment— no  doubt  a  favourite  resort  for  the  Yeddo  people  in 
spring  and  summer,  but  shunned  by  them  in  this  cold 
weather.  I  also  visited  Ogi^  another  favourite  resort  for  plea- 
sure-seekers in  the  proper  season,  but  now  almost  empty. 
Everywhere  round  about  Yeddo  evergreens  are  abundant. 
The  hedges  are  always  green,  formed  of  cryptomeria  and  a 
sort  of  box ;  and  the  country  even  now  has  a  clothed  and 
pleasing  appearance.     The  camellia,  frequently  a  fair-sized 


YEDDO.  533 

tree,  is  everywhere ;  but  the  great  charm  of  the  country — 
flowers — ^is  wanting,  or  at  any  rate,  rarely  seen  at  this  season. 
The  road  to  Ogi,  leading  through  Teddo  for  about  four  miles, 
and  afterwards  another  four  miles  through  villages,  for  the 
most  part  was  so  bad,  that  we  had  to  abandon  our  ginrick* 
shas  on  more  than  one  occasion.  So  much  for  the  macadam- 
ised roads  of  Japan. 

With  my  young  German  friend  I  went  to  the  theatre,  a 
spacious  building,  but  there  was  no  performance  going  on. 
Afterwards  I  accompanied  him  to  the  house  of  the  Minister 
of  Instruction,  where,  at  a  large  party,  he  had  dined  the  day 
before ;  and  being  obliged  to  eat  his  dinner  with  chopsticks, 
he  had  taken  out  his  penknife  to  sharpen  the  points,  and  in* 
advertently  had  left  it  on  the  Minister's  table.  Our  visit  was 
for  the  purpose  of  recovering  the  penknife  ;  but  alas  I  no  pen- 
knife was  forthcoming ;  nor  was  it  likely  it  should  have  been, 
for  Japanese  servants  are  very  light-fingered ;  at  least  so  they 
tell  me,  though,  so  far,  I  must  confess,  I  am  not  aware  they 
have  ever  prigged  anything  from  me.  Seeing  the  rage  for 
everything  European  in  Yeddo  and  Yokohama  just  now,  I 
should  have  thought  the  Minister  of  Instruction  would  have 
supplied,  his  European  guests  with  knives  and  forks.  But  no ; 
chopsticks,  and  chopsticks  only,  were  supplied  them,  with 
which  to  eat  their  dinner ;  and  a  very  inefficient  substitute 
they  proved  to  be.  There  is  a  post-office  now  in  Yeddo,  and 
pillar-boxes  at  the  corners  of  many  of  the  streets.  The  men 
have  lately  taken  to  muffiers,  and  they  are  now  generally 
used.  I  mentioned  the  other  day,  speaking  of  the  furore  of 
these  people  for  new  things,  that  1400  dollars  had  been  paid 
for  twenty-two  rabbits  imported  from  San  Francisco  by  the 
last  steamer  that  had  arrived.  I  now  learn  that  the  fortunate 
purchaser  has  realised  a  profit  of  1000  dollars :  he  had  sold 
his  rabbits  for  2400  dollars  to  some  Government  employes, 
who  had  presented  them  as  a  new  year's  gift  to  the  Mikado  I 
When  at  Asazas  the  other  day,  I  saw  a  large  assortment  of 
rabbits,  which  I  might  have  bought  at  one  and  a  half  boos 
a  piece  (Is.  6d.)  There  was  one  rabbit,  however,  in  the  lot 
I  saw  there  for  which  the  owner  demanded  100  dollars.  In 
what  the  particular  merit  of  this  rabbit  consisted  I  failed  to 
discover. 


534  FIRING  TEA. 

Wihy  Saturdojf^  an  board  tke  steamer  'Galley  of  IjOttu.^ — 
We  left  Yokohama  yesterdaj  bound  to  Kobe,  but  with  bad 
coal  we  are  making  bat  slow  progress.  The  weather  is  fine, 
bat  oolcL  Before  leaving  Yokohama  yesterday  I  paid  a  yiflit 
to  a  tea-firing  establishment  The  performance  of  this  opera- 
tion derolves  npon  the  merchants  of  Yokohama.  In  China, 
on  the  contrary,  the  tea  is  brought  from  the  place  of  its 
growth  to  the  seaports  in  packages  ready  for  shipment  In 
the  establishment  which  I  Tisited  I  saw  200  girls  employed 
in  stirring  abont  the  tea  in  small,  deep  iron  pans,  set  in 
brickwork,  each  pan  with  a  small  charcoal  fire  ander  it,  and 
each  girl  in  charge  of  two  pans.  This  is  the  drying  process,  to 
which  all  tea  brought  from  the  tea-districts  is  first  subjected, 
and  is  called  ^'  firing  the  tea."  If  it  is  desired  to  give  the  tea  a 
greenish  colour,  a  couple  of  pinches  of  gypsum  and  a  pinch 
of  Prussian  blue  is  put  into  each  pan,  containing  about  four 
pounds  of  tea,  and  thoroughly  incorporated  with  it  The 
firing  operation  takes  about  two  hours,  and  is  conse- 
quently repeated  by  each  girl  half-a-dozen  times  a  day. 
After  drying  comes  the  sifting.  This  is  accomplished 
by  a  simple  piece  of  machinery  driven  by  a  small  steam- 
engine.  It  consists  of  half-a-dozen  sieves,  of  different 
degrees  of  fineness,  placed  on  an  inclined  plane,  to  which  the 
machinery  imparts  a  shaking  motion,  the  first  sieve  allowing 
only  the  finest  grain  tea  to  pass  through,  and  so  on  to  the 
sixth  sieve,  the  coarsest  tea  of  all  falling  over  the  tail  of  the 
line  of  sieves.  From  these  sieves  the  tea  is  conducted  by  long 
sacks  affixed  to  them  underneath  into  receivers  ;  but  before 
reaching  the  mouth  of  the  tea-conducting  sack,  a  draught 
of  air,  caused  by  a  revolving  fan,  blows  the  dust  out  of  it  into 
another  sack,  which  conducts  into  a  receiver  at  the  bottom. 
After  the  machinery-sifting^  a  portion  of  the  tea  is  still  found 
to  require  a  further  sifting,  and  this  is  done  by  hand.  The 
tea  that  passes  through  the  first  sieve  is  very  fine  grain,  and 
this  is  called  hyson-tips.  It  is  composed,  in  fSsK^t,  of  the  tips  of 
the  leaves;  and  so  on  to  the  end,  each  quality,  determined  by 
the  size  of  the  grain,  having  its  own  peculiar  name.  There 
is  a  portion  of  this  tea  which  by  special  manipulation  is  roUed 
up  in  larger  grains,  all  of  one  size,  and  is  christened  gun- 
powder,  much  liked  by  old  ladies.     The  processes  of  drying. 


FIRING  TEA— KOBE.  535 

colonriDg — if  it  be  coloured — and  sifting  being  completed,  it 
is  now  put  up  generally  in  paper  pound  and  half-pound  pao* 
kets,  and  stowed  into  boxes  lined  with  sheet-lead.  A  variety 
of  names,  however,  such  as  '^  from  the  Mikado's  own  tea-gar- 
dens/' &a,  &C.,  &c.,  having  been  first  pasted  on  the  paper 
packets.  The  girls  working  at  the  firing  process,  who  earn, 
I  am  told,  about  one  and  a  half  dollars  (7s.)  a  week,  working 
on  Sundays  also,  are  all  clothed  at  this  cold  season,  but  in  the 
summer  their  costume  is  limited  to  a  small  loin-cloth,  and 
the  perspiration,  running  profusely  from  their  naked  bodies  as 
they  lean  over  the  iron  pans,  no  doubt  occasionally  imparts 
a  fleshy  flavour  to  the  tea.  When  received  into  the  firing- 
room,  the  tea  is  turned  out  of  the  boxes  in  which  it  is  brought 
from  the  country  into  a  large  bin,  and  there  it  is  pressed  into 
small  compass  by  men  treading  it  with  naked  feet  Here, 
then,  is  another  source  of  flavour  imparted  to  the  tea  other 
than  what  is  natural  to  the  leaf.  The  great  bulk  of  the  tea 
shipped  from  Japan  goes  to  the  States ;  a  very  small  por- 
tion of  it  finds  its  way  into  the  English  market  The  best 
Japanese  tea,  they  tell  me,  comes  from  the  neighbourhood 
of  Osaka,  and  is  shipped  at  the  treaty  port  of  Kobe* 

Yesterday  was  a  wretched  day,  very  cold,  and  blowing 
strong  right  in  our  teeth.  On  leaving  Yokohama,  we  calcu- 
lated on  reaching  Kobe  at  six  o'clock  this  morning ;  it  is 
now  noon,  and  we  have  still  a  hundred  miles  or  more  to  do 
before  we  can  let  go  our  anchor,  and  this  will  take  us  a  good 
twelve  hours.  We  are  now  off  Oscima,  the  turning-point,  I 
may  say,  of  our  trip,  for  we  now  enter  the  gulf  leading  up 
to  Kobe,  our  treaty  port 

\^tK — ^At  5  A.]i.  yesterday  we  anchored  at  Kobe,  the 
English  settlement  corresponding  with  Osaka,  a  city  and  a 
treaty  port,  about  twenty-two  miles  by  land  from  Kobe,  now 
being  bridged  over  by  a  railway  in  course  of  construction. 
I  landed  here  in  a  snowstorm,  the  first  experienced  this 
winter.  The  weather  cleared  up  in  the  afternoon,  and  en- 
abled me  to  visit  the  waterfalls,  distant  from  the  settlement 
a  couple  of  miles.  From  the  settlement  the  ascent  for  about 
a  mile  is  gradual  towards  the  base  of!  a  range  of  high  hills, 
and  then  an  ascent  of  about  500  feet  over  a  good  path  lined 
on  both  sides  with  tea-houses,  but  not  much  visited  at  this 


536  KOBE— OSAKA, 

cold  season,  each  with  its  quaint  little  garden,  and  situated 
amongst  a  good  sprinkling  of  pine-trees.  The  two  falls  are 
about  the  same  height,  say  fifty  feet,  and  are  both  yerj 
pretty;  the  lower  one  is  unbroken  from  top  to  bottom. 
Lower  down  the  water  is  utilised  to  work  some  half-dozen 
paddy-mills,  being  conducted  for  this  purpose  to  the  wheels 
in  tlm)ugh  the  roofs  of  the  buildings.  It  must  be  channiD«: 
roundabout  these  falls  in  summer,  when  the  trees  are  in  fall 
leaf  and  the  flowers  in  bloom.  There  is  a  handsome  Sintoo 
temple  situated  on  the  road  to  the  falls,  with  some  very  good 
carving  about  it 

Mr  B ,  with  whom  I  dined  to-day,,  told  a  story  of  a 

Japanese  residing  at  a  temple  in  Yeddo  being  asked  which 
of  the  two  religions  he  liked  best— the  Sintoo  or  the  Bud- 
dhist ;  and  after  a  good  deal  of  humming  and  hawing,  he  at 
last  replied  that  he  preferred  the  Sintoo,  for  the  priests  did 
all  the  praying,  whilst  as  a  Buddhist  he  had  both  to  pay  and 
to  pray. 

According  to  a  recently  published  code  of  laws,  robbery  to 
to  the  amount  of  300  dollars  is  punishable  with  death  hy 

the  Japanese.     Mr  B told  me  the  following  story  :-^A 

thief  had  broken  into  a  house,  and  had  wounded  an  old  gentle- 
man, possibly  unintentionally,  who  had  endeavoured  to  appre- 
hend him.  The  thief  was  subsequently  caught,  tried,  and 
sentenced  to  two  years*  imprisonment  The  son  of  the  old 
gentleman  who  had  been  wounded,  an  officer  in  the  army, 
thinking  the  sentence  a  very  lenient  one,  wrote  to  the  judge 
who  had  tried  the  thief,  and  told  him  so,  and  the  judge 
without  more  ado  quashed  the  first  sentence,  and  condemned 
the  thief  to  be  beheaded — and  beheaded  he  watk  I 

16M,  Osaka. — We  visited  the  mint  to-day,  at  the  head  of 
which  establishment  is  Miyor  Kinder.  It  has  been  erected 
within  the  last  three  years,  and  has  been  in  full  work  since 
1871.  Up  to  the  present  time  between  thirty  and  forty  mil- 
lions of  dollars  have  been  coined.  The  whole  affikir  seems 
yery  complete,  and  fitted  with  all  the  best  apparatus,  appa- 
rently regardless  of  expense.  The  work  hitherto  has  con- 
sisted principally  in  turning  nibus,  an  old  coin,  containing 
22  per  cent  of  gold  and  78  per  cent  of  silver,  into  a  new 
gold    and   silver   coinage,  in   which    operation,   I  under- 


THE  MINT.  537 

stand,  the  whole  loss  in  weight  consists  of  one-eighth  of 
a  dollar  in  a  thousand  dollars'  worth  of  the  precious 
metals.  Both  the  gold  and  silver  coin  is  alloyed  with 
copper.  Major  Kinder  says  that  occasionally  they  turn 
out  half  a  million  of  dollars  daily  in  gold  and  silver ;  and 
notwithstanding  the  large  amount  coined  at  this  mint  since 
1871 — ^between  thirty  and  forty  millions  of  dollars — it  is 
hardly  ever  met  with  in  circulation  in  or  about  the  great 
centres  of  trade,  Yokohama  and  Teddo ;  paper  money,  and 
nothing  else,  is  seen  in  circulation  there.  What  becomes  of 
the  coined  money  is  not  very  well  known,  but  it  is  clear  to 
me  it  must  be  hoarded  somewhere  or  other.  They  are  adding 
to  the  present  mint  buildings  large  works  for  the  manufac- 
ture of  sulphuric  acid,  an  article  that  costs  them  now  about 
a  shilling  a  pound  for  what  is  consumed  at  the  mint ;  and  it 
is  calcTilated  that  it  can  be  manufactured  on  the  spot  for  about 
twopence.  One  leaden  chamber,  nearly  finished,  is  a  hundred 
feet  long,  twenty  wide,  and  twenty  deep.  At  these  works, 
they  say,  one  ton  of  sulphuric  acid  may  be  manufactured 
daily.  The  assaying  department  is  very  complete,  and  so  is 
that  in  which  the  dies  for  the  coins  are  made.  The  coke  and 
the  gas  required  are  both  made  on  the  premises.  In  the 
assaying  department  I  did  not  get  a  very  flattering  account 
of  the  aptitude  of  the  Japanese  for  the  work  in  which  they 
are  employed,  but  in  another  department  I  received  a  more 
favourable  account  of  them.  They  are,  at  any  rate,  very 
tractable  and  easily  managed.  They  receive  from  eight  to 
twenty  dollars  a  month,  and  a  house  to  live  in.  All  the 
various  branches  were  in  work  when  I  was  at  the  mint  this 
morning ;  they  were  assaying,  melting,  and  coining,  and  also 
grinding  the  old  crucibles  and  recovering  the  gold  and  silver 
absorbed  by  them.  They  were  also  employed  in  separating 
the  gold  from  the  silver  contained  in  the  nibus  by  sulphuric 
acid,  the  gold  falling  to  the  bottom,  and  the  silver  remaining 
in  solution  until  precipitated  by  the  application  of  copper, 
and  then  pressed  into  cakes  and  melted.  To  facilitate  the 
operation,  the  nibus  were  first  granulated.  The  automaton 
weighing-machine,  which  separates  as  it  weighs  the  coins  of 
proper  weight  from  those  that  are  light  and  those  that  are  too 
heavy,  is  a  beautiful  little  machine,  and  has  been  made  to 


538  TYCOON'S  CASTLE. 

work  more  rapidly  by  means  of  a  magnet  fastened  so  as  to 
act  on  the  steel  beam,  the  invention  of  Mr  Smith.  This  mint 
machinery  was  first  erected  at  Hong-Kong,  but  the  Grovernor, 
M' Donald^  taking  it  into  his  head  that  the  operation  of  coin- 
ing would  be  a  losing  one,  sold  the  whole  afhir  for  yery  much 
below  its  cost,  they  tell  me,  to  the  Japanese  GoYernment. 
This  sale  is  said  by  those  who  are  capable  of  judging  to 
have  been  a  great  mistake. 

From  the  mint  we  went  to  the  Tycoon's  castle,  perhaps  the 
finest  fortress  in  Japan.  It  covers  at  least  one  hundred  acres 
of  ground,  and  is  surrounded  by  an  outer  and  inner  moat, 
and  a  wall  of  some  fifty  feet  in  height.  Some  of  the  stones  in 
the  inner  walls  are  of  great  size.  One  of  irregular  shape,  which 
I  measured  roughly,  I  found  to  be  more  than  forty  feet  long,  nine 
feet  high,  and  nine  feet  thick.  When  I  visited  tiiis  castle  three 
years  ago,  during  the  war,  there  was  nothing  on  the  inside 
of  it  but  the  charred  remains  of  the  former  buildings.  Now 
it  contains  extensive  barracks  and  several  regiments  of  in- 
fantry. 

1 1th. — Hired  ginrickshas  this  morning  and  went  to  Sumi- 
yoshL  On  the  way  we  visited  Tenpgee,  where  there  are  seve- 
ral temples,  and  also  a  pagoda  ninety  feet  high,  from  the  top 
of  which  we  obtained  a  good  view  of  the  city  and  surrounding 
country.  Two  miles  and  a  half  farther  on  we  came  to  Sumi- 
yoshi,  which  is  just  five  miles  from  the  foreign  concession  at 
Osaka.  There  are  numberless  monuments  and  a  celebrated 
temple  here,  and  tea-houses  in  abundance.  There  is  a  bridge 
here  over  a  small  sheet  of  water,  some  fifty  feet  wide,  and  so 
steep  is  it,  that  with  difficulty  one  mounts  up  it  and  descends 
on  the  other  side  without  holding  on  by  the  raiL  This  bridge 
is  only  about  sixty  feet  long,  and  the  crown  of  it  has  a  rise 
of  about  fifteen  feet  It  is  a  wooden  bridge,  standing  on 
some  twenty  stone  piers.  Why  it  has  been  made  so  steep  I 
cannot  tell,  for  there  is  no  passage  underneath  it  for  boats. 
A  funeral  was  being  conducted  when  we  arrived  at  Sumi* 
yoshi  A  large  plain  deal  box  with  a  movable  cover  to  it 
was  slung  and  carried  on  a  pole  from  one  temple  to  the  en- 
trance of  another ;  other  men  bore  along  several  smaller 
boxes,  all  of  which  were  deposited  at  the  entrance  of  the 
temple.    In  this  temple  were  a  dozen  priests,  dressed  in  blue 


A  FUNERAL.  539 

petticoats^  with  a  sort  of  white  poncho  over,  chanting 
prayers^  or  perhaps  a  mass.  From  the  boxes  were  taken 
several  trays  of  fruit  and  flowers,  all  of  which  were  carried 
into  the  temple,  and  after  a  while  the  cover  of  the  large  deal 
box  was  taken  off,  and  the  little  corpse  (for  it  was  but  a 
small  child),  wrapped  in  white  cloth,  was  lifted  out  and 
carried  into  the  temple  up  some  steps,  and  deposited  some- 
where behind  a  curtain.  After  a  long  course  of  praying, 
accompanied  by  constant  prostrations  and  genuflexions,  the 
ceremony  came  to  an  end,  and  the  trays  of  fruit  and  flowers 
were  brought  out  of  the  temple  and  placed  in  the  boxes,  and 
taken  away  to  the  fijrst  temple,  whence  they  had  been  brought 
in  the  first  instance.  The  whole  service  lasted  an  hour,  and 
bore  a  great  resemblance  to  a  service  in  a  Catholic  chapel.  No 
one  entered  the  court  in  front  of  this  temple  but  the  priests  and 
other  dignitaries  during  the  performance  of  the  service,  but 
the  paling  outside  was  thronged  by  a  dense  and  very  orderly 
crowd,  attracted  by  the  ceremony.  The  priests  were  got  up 
in  full  feather,  and  wore  on  their  heads  curiously  shaped 
straw  hats. 

Like  all  other  temples  I  have  seen  in  Japan,  this  one  was 
surrounded  by  places  of  amusement,  but  all  empty  in  this 
cold  weather. 

20th. — On  the  18th  we  paid  a  visit  to  the  execution  ground 
at  Osaka,  and  were  disappointed.  There  were  neither  heads 
nor  trunks  to  be  seen  there,  notwithstanding  the  Governor 
had  said  to  a  friend  of  mine  only  a  few  days  before,  that  he 
ruled  over  300,000  people,  and  was  constantly  cutting  off  heads, 
and  still  there  were  many  thieves  left  I 

The  next  day,  19th,  we  went  with  Mr  C.  to  look  at  an 
exhibition  of  waxworks.  We  had  hard  work  to  find  the  place, 
and  it  was  not  until  Mr  C.  had  mounted  to  the  top  of  a  ^^  fire 
look*out,"  and  took  a  survey  of  the  surrounding  neighbour- 
hood, that  we  discovered  the  place  we  were  in  search  of.  The 
building  in  which  the  figures  were  shown  was  but  a  rickety 
affair.  The  first  figures  we  came  to  were  two  men,  repre- 
senting the  owner  of  an  orchard,  and  a  brigand  who  had 
come  to  rob  him.  The  poor  fellow,  the  owner  of  the  orchard, 
after  a  dreadful  struggle,  had  been  cut  down,  desperately 
wounded,  and  the  brigand  was  represented  in  the  act   of 


540  IVAX  FIGURES. 

giying  him  the  ecfup  de  grace.  The  wonnded  man  is  depicted 
trae  to  natare.  Then  came  an  encounter  between  an  old 
man,  a  hermit  probably,  and  a  two-s worded  fellow;  but  the 
history  I  could  not  unravel,  neither  could  I  unravel  the  two 
or  three  scenes  that  followed,  in  which  ladies  were  the  prin- 
cipal actors.  Several  other  groups  followed,  all  representing 
men  engaged  in  some  tragedy,  and  towards  the  finale  of  the 
exhibition  were  two  scenes  which  struck  me  as  admirable ;  I 
mean,  the  execution  of  the  figures  was  wonderfully  true  to 
nature.  The  one  represented  a  policeman  cutting  off  a  boy's 
hair,  and  the  other  was  a  watchman  in  the  act  of  striking 
together  two  pieces  of  wood,  which  living  watchmen  in  Japan 
always  carry  with  them,  and  with  which  they  keep  up  a 
constant  beating  throughout  the  night,  for  the  purpose,  I 
should  think,  of  giving  warning  to  the  thieves,  for  I  cannot 
see  any  good  purpose  served  by  it  This  sort  of  scenic 
exhibition  is  brought  to  great  perfection  in  Japan,  and  is  an 
institution  of  many  centuries  standing ;  though,  I  daresay, 
Madame  Tussaud  fancied  she  was  the  first  person  who  had 
hit  upon  such  a  means  of  growing  rich.  These  %ure8, 
however,  were  not  made  of  wax ;  the  groundwork  is  of  wood, 
over  which  is  a  layer  of  very  fine  cement,. covered  with  a 
coat  of  paint  artistically  laid  on,  and  truly  representing 
Japanese  fiesh.  I  have  forgotten  to  say  that  Mr  C.  and 
myself  Went  by  invitation  to  witness  the  performance  of  some 
dancing-girls  at  a  tea-house,  got  up  expressly  for  our 
edification.  There  were  a  dozen  girls,  all  of  them  disgust- 
ingly ugly,  nearly  all  of  them  with  their  teeth  blackened. 
This  was  the  first  time  I  had  seen  unmarried  women  with 
black  teeth,  but  I  am  told  it  is  common  about  Osaka  for 
girls  of  a  certain  age  to  blacken  their  teeth,  whilst  at  Yeddo 
none  but  married  women  have  recourse  to  such  an  operation. 
Perhaps  the  girls  about  here  resort  to  the  practice  to  impose 
upon  the  public,  and  to  command  more  respect  in  the  streets 
than  they  are  properly  entitled  to.  Among  the  lot  were  two 
young  things  not  over  eleven  years  of  age,  both  provided 
with  small  polished  steel  mirrors,  a  supply  of  white  powder, 
and  a  preparation  of  betel-nut,  which  they  applied  every 
now  and  then  to  their  faces  and  lips,  without  any  idea,  ap- 
parently, they  were  doing  anything  to  create  remark.    The 


DANCING  GIRLS,  541 

musical  instrument,  upon  which  in  turn  all  the  girls  played, 
was  a  sort  of  three-stringed  guitar,  and  they  struck  the 
strings  with  a  piece  of  ivory  in  the  shape  of  a  wedge.  At 
times  some  of  them  sang,  and  the  music  served  as  an  accom- 
paniment, or  some  played  whilst  others  danced.  They  were 
dressed  in  long  rich  robes,  reaching  half  a  yard  beyond  their 
feet.  The  dancing  consisted  mainly  of  bodily  contortions, 
accompanied  by  a  constant  movement  of  the  hands  and  arms 
keeping  time  with  the  music.  I  sat  upon  a  mat  upon  my 
heels,  with  my  boots  off,  longer  than  I  cared  for  witnessing 
the  exhibition,  and  was  glad  when  it  came  to  an  end,  for 
neither  the  singing,  the  playing,  nor  the  dancing  possessed 
more  than  very  ordinary  interest  for  me. 

20M. — Having  been  disappointed  in  procuring  permission 
from  the  authorities  to  visit  Kioto,  we  returned  to  Kobe 
to-day  by  land  in  ginrickshas.  The  distance  is  about  twenty- 
two  miles,  and  we  came  down  in  four  hours  and  a  half,  in- 
cluding half  an  hour  that  we  rested  in  a  tea-house.  We  had 
two  men  to  each  ginricksha,  and  they  trotted  the  whole  way, 
in  spite  of  the  heavy  roads,  the  result  of  two  nights'  rain, 
full  of  ruts  and  puddles  of  water.  On  the  whole  route, 
mainly  by  the  Tocaido,  there  is  nowhere  the  ghost  of  pave- 
ment, nor  of  any  macadamising.  I  frequently  recur  to  the 
fact  that  I  have  met  with  no  macadamised  roads  in  Japan, 
in  consequence  of  having  seen  it  stated  over  and  over  again 
that  the  roads  throughout  the  country  were  equal  to  our  own, 
and  that  macadamising  was  practised  here  before  we  had 
ever  heard  of  it.  With  little  exception,  you  pass  through  a 
string  of  towns  and  villages  on  the  whole  route  between 
Osaka  and  Kobe,  and  the  country,  a  sandy  plain,  is  entirely 
covered  with  crops  of  wheat  and  turnip-raddish,  the  latter 
having  been  transplanted  from  seed-beds  into  the  ground 
from  which  a  crop  of  rice  was  taken  in  November,  and  which 
will  again  be  sown  with  rice  in  June.  All  the  crops  are 
sown  or  drilled  in  rows ;  and  as  we  came  along  to-day,  very 
strong  liquid  manure  indeed,  dipped  out  of  large  casks  sunk 
in  the  ground,  was  being  extensively  applied  to  them,  wholly 
by  hand-labour.  These  large  sunken  casks  are  dotted  in 
great  numbers  over  the  plain. 

We  took  a  walk  of  five  miles  yesterday  in  the  vicinity  of 


542  KOBE. 

Osaka^  and  on  either  side  was  a  row  of  vegetable  wax-trees, 
leafless  now.  They  have  the  appearance  of  apple-trees.  The 
berries  grow  in  bunches  on  these  trees,  and  from  them  the 
wax  is  expressed.  The  fruit  of  the  persimmon-tree,  pressed 
when  in  an  unripe  state,  produces  a  liquid  with  which  the 
Japanese  stain  furniture  a  black  colour.  It  is  called  strdwo. 
There  is  also  a  tree  here  which  produces  the  lacquer  so  exten- 
sively used  in  Japan.  The  tree  is  tapped,  and  the  lacquer 
exudes,  of  a  white  colour,  which  turns  black  on  coming  into 
contact  with  atmospheric  air,  as  does  also  the  milk  from  the 
india-rubber-tree.  This  tree  has  been  sometimes  confounded 
with  the  vegetable  wax-tree,  and  said  to  be  the  same ;  but 
this  is  a  mistake — ^they  are  distinct  trees. 

2idL — I  have  been  here  now  three  days,  and  have  pretty 
well  exhausted  the  place.  This  Kobe  is  the  foreign  settle- 
ment tacked  on  to  the  east  end  of  the  native  town  of  Hiogo, 
which  contains  about  sixty  thousand  inhabitants.  On  the 
seaside  of  Kobe  there  is  a  well-made  bund,  with  a  row 
of  very  nice-looking  foreigners'  houses  all  along.  Numerous 
streets  run  up  from  the  bund  towards  the  base  of  the  line  of 
hills,  about  a  mile  distant,  which  are  again  intersected  by 
other  streets  running  parallel  with  the  bund.  New  houses 
are  being  built  in  all  directions,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt 
that  Kobe  is  destined  to  become  a  place  of  extensive  trade. 
During  the  last  six  months  more  business  has  been  trans- 
acted in  Kobe  than  during  the  previous  twelve  months,  both 
in  imports  and  exports.  There  are  many  Japanese  steamers 
running  on  the  coast,  but  the  thriving  business  carried  on 
between  Yokohama,  Kobe,  and  Shanghai  is  entirely  in  the 
hands  of  the  Pacific  Mail  Steam  Company,  and  occupies  one 
steamer  a  week.  There  are  some  four  or  five  boats  constantly 
running,  all  bad,  and  ever  breaking  down  or  not  keeping 
time;  but  as  they  have  no  competition,  they  are  of  necessity 
extensively  patronised.  This  is  the  branch  line  of  the  Pacific 
Mail  Steam  Company  that  pays  so  well,  and  it  is  only  won- 
derful that  English  capitalists  should  have  allowed  them  to 
monopolise  so  good  a  business  for  so  long  a  time.  One 
of  these  steamers  has  just  broken  down,  and  another,  which  is 
now  in  this  port,  belonged  to  the  Peninsular  and  Oriental 
Company,  and  was  lying  on  the  beach  at  Yokohama  for  a 


KOBE,  543 

year  or  more  as  useless,  when  she  was  bought  bj  the  Ameri- 
can company  for  10,000  dollars^  patched  up,  and  put  upon 
this  line.  She  is  a  miserable  little  thing ;  no  one  dares  to 
ship  specie  by  her.  We  and  the  Germans  are  in  a  large 
majority  here,  and  still  we  continue  to  depend  upon  the 
Americans  for  steamers — and  very  inefficient  ones — in  a  very 
profitable  trade.  The  principal  exports  from  hence  to  Europe 
are  tea,  vegetable  wax,  sea-weed,  and  rice.  The  tea  grown 
in  this  neighbourhood  is,  they  say,  the  best  in  Japan.  The 
railway  between  this  and  Osaka  is  progressing,  but  it  will 
take  a  year  yet  before  it  will  be  opened  for  traffic.  The 
gauge  is  three'  feet  six  inches,  a  single  line,  twenty-two  miles. 
At  present  the  traffic  between  Kobe  and  Osaka  is  carried  on 
by  small  steamers,  of  which  there  are  half-a-dozen  constantly 
running,  and  they  take  from  two  to  three  hours  on  the  pas- 
sage, depending  on  the  state  of  the  tide  and  the  weather. 
Japanese  pay  a  boo  (Is.)  for  a  passage,  whilst  foreigners  are 
made  to  pay  a  dollar  by  one  boat,  and  half  a  dollar  by  the 
others;  and  on  board  all  mix  up  together.  But  it  is  not 
only  on  board  these  steamers  that  the  foreigner  is  looked 
upon  as  fair  game  to  be  fleeced :  of  course  he  is  in  all  ways 
and  in  everything  fleeced  more  or  less  in  Japan.  The  other 
day,  at  Asaxas,  I  went  to  mount  a  pagoda,  accompanied  by  a 
Japanese,  and  the  priest  in  charge  demanded  a  dollar  from 
me,  whilst  the  Japanese  was  permitted  to  go  up  for  one  cent ; 
and  so  it  is  throughout.  Kobe  suflers  occasionally  from 
typhoons,  but  is  on  the  whole  considered  a  safe  harbour  for 
shipping.  The  land  ceded  to  foreigners  for  building  purposes 
is  now  found  to  be  inadequate  to  their  requirements,  and  they 
are  squabbling  with  the  Japanese  officials  on  the  subject  of 
an  extension. 

It  would  seem  that  in  business  matters  these  Japanese 
are  veiy  slippery  fish  to  deal  with,  and  you  never  know  when 
you  have  them ;  but  they  will  be  better  by  and  by.  What 
can  be  expected  from  the  class — ^the  mercantile  class — ^with 
whom  we  have  to  do  principally,  when  we  know  that  for  the 
last  three  centuries  or  more  that  Japan  has  been  shut  up 
from  the  world.  The  mercantile  or  trading  class  was  at  the 
bottom  of  the  social  scale,  even  below  a  fellow  who  groomed 


544  THE  MOON  TEMPLE. 

a  Daimio's  horse  I    They  were  literally  considered  the  dregs 
of  society  who  were  employed  in  trade. 

24^^ — Ought  to  have  sailed  to-day  for  Hong-Kong  in  the 
Galley  of  LamSj  but  a  row  among  the  men  who  are  employed 
in  shipping  her  cargo  has  caused  some  delay,  and  we  shall 
now  probably  not  get  away  until  to-morrow  afternoon.     Yes- 
terday,  went  over  a  tea-firing  establishment.    Some  150  girls 
were  employed  in  firing  the  tea,  and  afterwards  in  filling 
paper  bags,  holding  some  half-pound  up  to  two  pounds  each ; 
a  Chinaman  packed  the  papers  into  boxes  lined  with  sheet- 
lead  as  fast  as  the  girls  filled  them.     Upon  these  papers 
were  printed  instructions  for  making  tea,  and  grand  names 
of  the  estates  and  districts  from  which  it  was  pretended  the 
tea  was  procured  or  where  it  was  grown.    The  whole  was 
being  sent  to  San  Francisco.     This  afternoon,  with  Mr  C,  I 
walked  up  to  the  Moon  Temple,  about  seven  miles,  situated 
on  the  top  of  the  range  of  hills  at  the  back  of  the  settlement, 
at  a  height,  by  my  aneroid,  of  2000  feet  above  the  sea.    There 
is  a  good  path  all  the  way,  until  within  400  or  500  feet  of 
the  summit,  when  it  becomes  very  steep  and  rather  rougL 
The  approach  to  the  temple,  which  has  nothing  to  distinguish 
it  from  thousands  of  olher  temples  in  Japan,  is  by  a  flight  of 
256  stone  steps,  with  risers  of  about  eight  inches.    The  ascent 
is  through  a  gorge,  by  a  winding,  and  at  times  a  zigzag 
path,  and  the  views  from  the  temple  over  Kobe  and  along 
the  coast  must  be  extensive  in  clear  weather.      When  we 
reached  the  temple  to-day,  the  atmosphere  was  hazy,  and  the 
view  consequently  confined  to  Kobe  and  its  immediate  neigh- 
bourhood.    On  the  road  up  we  visited  a  rice-cleaning  mill, 
with  a  hundred  stamps  going,  worked  by  water-power.    As 
fast  as  the  rice  was  cleaned  it  was  put  into  straw  bags,  con- 
taining each  100  pounds,  in  which  the  rice  is  shipped.    The 
Japan  rice  is  a  fine  large  plump  grain,  the  best  rice  in  the  East, 
I  think.    The  price  now  in  the  market  is  one  dollar  apiculof 
1 33^  lbs.     We  also  passed  through  a  cemetery,  where  we  saw 
the  charred  bones  of  recently-burnt  bodies,  and  two  fires 
were  laid  ready  for  any  bodies  that  might  arrive.     On  com- 
ing back,  we  walked  along  on  the  railway  in  course  of  con- 
struction between  Kobe  and  Osaka,  upon  which  the  rails  are 


CLIMATE  AND  CHARACTER,  545 

laid  for  three  miles.  There  are  some  large  pines  on  the 
slopes  of  some  of  the  hills,  and  the  narrow  paths  leading 
throagh  large  patches,  not  to  call  them  forests,  of  the  giant 
bamboo,  most  be  very  pleasant  in  snnuner.  In  the  present 
cold  weather  the  traveller  can  dispense  with  shade.  There 
can  be  little  difference  between  the  climates  of  Kobe  and 
Osaka.  I  have  been  ten  days  at  the  two  places,  and  have 
had  bnt  two  wet  days ;  the  thermometer  indoors,  without  a 
fire,  ranging  between  Se""  and  40";  out  of  doors,  a  little  frost 
in  the  early  morning,  or  rather  at  night.  I  am  told,  how- 
ever, that  this  time  last  year  there  was  skating  at  both 
places.  There  can  be  no  question  as  to  the  healthiness  of  the 
climate  of  Japan  from  end  to  end,  though  of  course  some- 
what colder  in  the  northern  than  in  the  southern  islands.  All 
along  the  coast,  and  in  the  centre  or  on  the  highest  hills,  the 
snow  remains  for  some  months  every  year. 

The  appearance  of  foreigners  scattered  all  over  the  empire 
indicates  a  thorough  good  climate  everywhere.  The  Japanese 
and  foreigners'  children  are  all  pictures  of  health.  The 
women  are  fat,  and  even  ruddy  generally,  and  the  men, 
though  very  short,  are  muscular,  but  bandy-legged  nineteen 
in  twenty  of  them.  I  often  ask  myself,  ^^  Do  I  like  these 
Japanese  ?  *'  and  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  I  do  like 
them,  they  are  so  courteous  in  their  manners,  and  so  good- 
tempered.  I  have  never  seen  a  Japanese  out  of  temper  but 
once.  They  have  a  keen  sense  of  the  ridiculous,  and  their 
risible  faccdties  are  easily  excited.  In  dealing  with  them  you 
must  be  prepared  for  extortion ;  they  will  often  ask  you  fifty 
doUars  for  an  article  which,  if  you  have  a  good  stock  of 
patience,  you  may  in  the  end  buy  for  ten  dollars.  A  banker 
told  me  he  never  knew  when  to  depend  on  a  bargain  being 
concluded.  If  a  Japanese  makes  an  arrangement  with  a 
banker  or  merchant  for  a  certain  stroke  of  business,  and  does 
not  return  to  fulfil  the  engagement,  having,  perhaps,  made  a 
more  satisfactory  arrangement  with  some  other  party,  or 
having  repented  of  having  made  the  arrangement  at  all,  on 
being  asked  for  an  explanation  of  his  conduct,  he  only  laughs, 
and  seems  quite  unconscious  that  he  has  done  anything  at 
all  reprehensible ;  and  so  it  is  that  foreigners  never  sell  to 
Japanese  on  credit,  nor  allow  goods  to  be  delivered  until 

2  M 


546  INLAND  SEA. 

fully  paid  for.  Japanese  senrants  always  get  a  "  squeeze " 
out  of  everything  they  bny  for  travellers,  or  for  their 
employers ;  bat  I  have  had  them  with  me  travelling,  and  I 
have  never  known  them  to  steal  from  me. 

26^A,  en  the  inland  aeay  an  board  the  ^  Galley  of  Tjome,^— 
At  eleven  o'clock  last  night  we  got  under  way  at  Hiogo,  just 
round  the  point  from  Kobe,  where  the  ship  had  moved  to 
from  her  anchorage  at  Kobe  to  take  in  her  cargo  of  rice  for 
Amoy.  She  was  four  days  taking  on  board  a  full  cargo, 
about  42,000  piculs,  for  which  she  gets,  I  believe,  to  Amoj, 
forty  cents  a  picnl,  so  that  she  makes  a  freight  of  about  16,800 
dollars.  Her  cargo  is  for  account  of  the  Japanese  Govern- 
ment, who  are  the  only  shippers  of  rice  from  Japan,  for- 
eigners being  prohibited  by  treaty  from  dealing  in  rice  for 
exportation.  The  present  price  of  the  article  in  Kobe  is  one 
dollar  or  4s.  5d.  a  picul  of  133^  pounds. 

At  Kobe  I  saw  in  a  godown-yard  a  number  of  temple 
bells,  broken  up  most  of  them,  bought  at  fifteen  doUais  a 
picul,  for  exportation  to  England,  where  the  metal  is  used, 
they  tell  me,  for  casting  cannon,  and  is  worth  £85  per  ton. 
No  rice  from  Japan  has  yet  ever  reached  the  English  market, 
so  its  value  has  never  been  tested,  but  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  it  will  be  much  liked,  if  properly  cleaned.  Several 
cargoes  are  now  on  the  way  home.  The  GaUey  of  Lome  is 
deep  enough,  drawing  nearly  twenty-two  feet  water.  She 
steams  fast  notwithstanding,  and  is  much  more  manageable 
than  she  was  when  we  were  coming  down  light  from  Yoko- 
hama. It  is  now  noon,  blowing  a  strong  breeze,  and  last 
night  was  very  cold,  and  a  little  sea  on,  though  we  are 
threading  our  way  through  a  crowd  of  ishinds,  of  all 
shapes  and  sizes,  and  completely  landlocked.  At  times 
there  is  a  stretch  across  of  twenty-five  miles,  but  geuerallj 
this  sea  is  much  narrower.  There  are  villages  every- 
where, and  cultivation  idso,  with  a  sprinkling  of  trees 
on  many  of  the  islands.  The  outline  of  the  islands  and 
the  mainland  is  very  diversified,  taking  all  sorts  of  shapes. 
The  conical  shape  is  very  general,  and  they  are  of  all  heights, 
from  a  few  hundreds  to  a  thousand  feet  We  calculate  that 
it  will  take  us  until  seven  to-morrow  morning  to  emerge 
into  the  open  sea  again.    Passed  at  10  a.m.  the  Caeta  Rich 


KOBE  TO  AMO  K  S47 

bound  from  Shanghai  t9  Yokohama;  great  numbers  of  junks 
moving  about.  At  0  a.ii.  we  passed  the  ruined  castle  of 
Takamatea. 

27^A. — Many  of  the  islands  amongst  which  we  sailed  yes* 
terday,  after  twelve  o'dock,  were  wooded  to  the  very  summit, 
and  others  were  cultivated  in  terraces  also  to  the  summit 
Some  of  them  were  beautiful  spots,  looking  very  inviting  as 
abodes  for  life.  There  is  no  end  to  towns  and  villages 
bordering  the  mainland  as  well  as  the  shores  of  the  islands 
of  this  inland  sea,  of  which  Kobe  might  be  called  the  eastern 
entrance,  and  Nagasaki  the  western,  a  distance  of  240  miles. 
We  slowed  down  for  a  few  hours  this  morning,  there  being 
some  narrow  channels  to  pass,  for  which  the  pilot  thought  it 
best  to  have  daylight  About  eight  o'clock  we  passed  the 
last  lighthouse  at  the  western  entrance  of  the  sea.  This 
morning  at  2  A.H.  we  landed  the  pilot  in  one  of  the  ship's 
boats  on  the  coast,  close  to  the  port  of  NagasakL  It  was  a 
nasty  operation  for  a  long  steamer  like  ours,  for  we  were 
obliged  to  go  in  very  close  to  the  shore,  and  the  weather  was 
rough  and  the  night  dark,  for  it  was  blowing  fresh.  Landing 
the  pilot  cost  us  two  good  hours.  Altogether  there  are  four 
lighthouses  in  the  inland  sea,  three  at  the  western  end,  and 
one  a  hundred  miles  or  so  from  the  eastern  end.  The  sea 
was  pretty  well  spotted  over  with  junks  and  small  boats,  the 
former  trading  between  Osaka,  Kobe,  places  in  the  inland 
sea,  and  Nagasaki ;  the  latter  fishing.  The  mainland  on 
both  sides  of  the  inland  sea  is  mountainous,  and  in  the 
distance  is  occasionally  seen  a  higher  range  of  mountains 
still,  well  covered  down  to  the  base  with  snow. 

2Wu — ^We  are  now  running  along  nine  knots,  with  some 
sea  on,  and  a  strong  breeze  abeam  from  N.W.  by  N.  The 
weather  is  cold,  and  showers  of  sleet  frequent.  We  have  a 
prospect  of  reaching  Amoy  on  31st  Yesterday  and  the 
previous  night  I  had  a  bad  time  of  it.  Over-eating  and 
drinking  for  ten  days  brought  in  its  train  what  with  me  is 
always  a  natural  result,  a  severe  attack  of  indigestion; 
starving,  and  a  tea-and-toast  and  arrowroot  diet  have  put 
me  to  rights  without  having  had  recourse  to  the  medicine- 
chest  We  have  a  rum  sort  of  fellow  as  steward  on  bpard 
this  ship ;  he  is  as  full  of  reasons  on  all  occasions  as  an  ^g%  is 


548  KOBE  TO  AMOY. 

full  of  meat  He  was  a  horseboy  at  Balaklava  daring  the 
Crimean  war,  and  there  he  lost  two  fingers  of  his  left  hand, 
his  share  of  the  advantages  derived  from  the  Russian  cam- 
paign. Well,  I  asked  him  if  he  oonld  make  me  a  basin  of 
arrowroot.  Of  course  he  could,  he  had  made  tons  of  it;  so 
he  went  to  work,  and  in  half  an  hour  made  his  appearance  at 
my  bedside  with  a  large  pie-dish  in  one  hand  chock-full  of  a 
dark  substance  exactly  resembling  glue ;  in  the  other  hand 
he  held  a  large  plate  with  three  dabs  of  butter,  weighing  at 
least  a  good  quarter  of  a  pound,  stuck  on  to  the  edge  of  it. 
"  Why,  steward,"  I  said,  taking  the  gluey-looking  substance 
from  him,  "  what  is  this  ?  "  "  Oh,  sir,  that  is  the  arrowroot" 
'^  And  what  makes  it  so  black?"  ^^  That  comes,  sir,  from 
the  mace  which  I  have  added  to  it."  I  took  a  spoon  and 
tasted.  ^^  Why,  steward,  it  has  been  made  with  salt  water." 
^^  No,  sir,  not  at  all ;  I  put  into  it  myself  (holding  up  his 
finger  and  thumb  pressed  closely  together),  only  the  smallest 
iota  of  salt ;  but  the  cook,  to  whom  I  handed  it  over  to 
be  boiled,  capsized  a  tin  of  salt  into  it"  ^'  And  this 
butter,  steward,  what  is  this  for  ? "  **  The  arrowroot  ia 
always  eaten  with  butter ;  I  have  in  my  time  made  tons  of 
it"  "  Steward,"  I  said,  "  take  this  mess  away ;  I  have  no 
doubt  you  will  think  me  very  dainty,  but  I  cannot  eat  this 
mess."  And  I  really  believe,  had  I  eaten  of  it,  of  my  own 
accord  I  never  should  have  got  out  of  my  berth;  and  this 
was  the  steward  who  looked  after  four  ladies  on  their  recent 
outward  passage  from  London  I  Besides  this  head-steward 
(headless  would  have  been  a  more  appropriate  name  for  him), 
there  was  a  boy  called  Dan,  who  passed  most  of  his  time 
admiring  himself  in  the  mirror  of  the  ladies'  cabin,  and  a 
Chinaman  picked  up  at  Singapore.  The  captain  asked  Dan 
yesterday  where  some  mutton  came  from  that  appeared  on 
the  table,  and  the  comprehensive  reply  he  received  was  that 
it  came  off  a  sheep  I  No  doubt  Dan  is  a  genius,  but  as  for 
the  real  work  of  the  cabin,  it  is  almost  all  done  by  the 
Chinaman ;  and  yet  these  three  fellows  are  good  as  an  amuse- 
ment to  Mr  C.  and  myself,  the  only  passengers,  for  they  are 
all  of  them  good-natured,  and  bear  chaffing  to  any  extent  A 
surly  steward  is  an  abomination  to  passengers. 

29^A. — ^At  noon  to-day  we  were  490  miles  from  Amoy,  and 


KOBE  TO  AMOY.  549 

we  maj  get  in  on  the  Slat  The  last  twenty-four  hours  we  have 
made  240  miles,  with  a  strong  breeze  from  the  N.W.  and  a 
fair  amount  of  sea.  The  weather  is  better  now,  though 
cloudy,  and  a  deal  less  sea;  it  is  cold  too.  The  ship  is 
very  deep,  being  only  1389  tons  register,  and  she  has  on 
board  2600  tons  rice. 

Febrtuary  lat. — Yesterday,  at  5  p.m.,  we  anchored  in  Amoy. 
As  we  entered  the  port,  with  a  smacking  breeze  blowing, 
three  boats  were  seen  approaching.  One  of  them  the 
** harbour'*  pilot-boat;  the  other  two,  rival  storekeepers' 
boats.  We  had  previously  taken  on  board  a  Chinaman,  who 
piloted  us  to  the  entrance,  as  the  captain  had  never  been  at 
Amoy  before.  As  the  three  boats  approached,  all  row-boats, 
the  engines  were  stopped ;  but  with  the  ship  so  laden,  she 
continued  to  forge  ahead  at  the  rate  of  five  or  six  miles  an 
hour.  The  ^^  harbour  "  pilot-boat,  which  was  a  little  ahead 
of  the  other  two  boats,  came  alongside,  and  caught  a  rope 
which  was  thrown  to  it;  the  other  rival  boats,  trying  who 
would  come  alongside  first,  came  on  both  together.  One  of 
them  passed  inside  the  pilot-boat,  between  the  boat  and  the 
ship,  and  being  badly  handled,  the  rope  by  which  the  pilot-* 
boat  was  made  fast  threatened  to  take  ofi^  the  heads  of  the 
whole  crew.  They  lost,  however,  only  their  hats,  as  the 
boat  drifted  past.  The  other  boat  was  not  so  fortunate ;  she 
came  right  across  the  bow  of  the  pilot-boat,  and  was  cut 
down  and  swamped,  the  crew  scrambling,  as  they  best  could, 
on  board  the  pilot-boat,  the  swamped  boat  going  out  to  sea 
on  its  own  account.  There  was  nobody  hurt,  so  the  scene 
was  as  laughable  as  it  was  exciting  to  those  who  were  merely 
lookers-on.  The  result  may  probably  have  the  efiect  of 
making  the  storekeepers  send  off  their  boats  with  more  effi- 
cient crews  for  the  future,  or  make  them  wait  until  such 
vessels  as  the  Galley  of  Lome  have  dropped  their  anchor 
before  coming  alongside.  As  soon  as  the  ship  had  anchored, 
we  passengers  went  with  the  captain  on  shore  in  the  pilot* 
boat.  We  had  no  sooner  landed  than  the  captain  received 
orders  from  his  consignees  to  proceed  on  to  Hong-Kong  with 
his  cargo  of  rice.  In  an  hour  afterwards  we  were  again 
under  way,  and  with  a  strong  tide  in  our  favour,  and  a 
brisk  gale  from  the  north,  we  must  have  been  going  over  the 


5  so  HONG  KOI^G— MACAO. 

ground  some  fifteen  or  sixteen  miles  an  hour.  All  night  we 
have  been  bowling  off  ten  and  a  half  knots  an  hour,  and  by 
midnight  we  expect  to  be  at  anchor  in  Victoria  Harbour. 
We  of  course  saw  but  little  of  Amoy.  The  inside  port  seems 
small,  but  offers  complete  shelter  to  as  many  vessels  as  it 
will  hold.  There  must  have  been  a  dozen  or  more  foreign 
vessels  lying  there,  all  with  cargoes  of  rice,  and  no  end 
of  Chinese  junks.  Rice,  I  heard,  was  worth  one  dollar 
seventy  cents  a  picul,  and  no  store-room  in  the  place  for 
further  cargoes.  Amoy  is  in  24''  30'  N.  lat.,  distant  £rom 
Hong-Kong  290  miles.  For  several  hours  yesterday  morning, 
whilst  running  along  the  coast  towards  Amoy  with  a  brisk 
monsoon,  our  track  lay  among  fishing-boats,  and  poles 
sticking  out  of  the  water,  evidently  fast  to  the  fishing-nets, 
serving,  I  suppose,  the  place  of  corks.  They  are  hardy  fellows, 
the  Chinese  fishermen ;  no  weather  seems  to  keep  them  at 
home,  and  their  little  boats  make  capital  weather.  The 
Japanese  do  not  appear  to  be  half  so  enterprising ;  their 
necessities  may  not  be  so  pressing. 

2rf,  Hong-Kong, — At  four  this  morning  we  anchored  in 
Hong-Kong,  and  immediately  after  breakfast  Mr  C.  and 
I  landed,  and  I  took  up  my  old  quarters  at  the  Hong-Kong 
Hotel.  Papers  in  the  clubs  to  20th  December.  Weather 
very  pleasant.     In  the  evening  went  to  the  Union  Church 

to  hear  Mr  L ;  the  old  gentleman  has  a  very  feeble 

voice,  and  it  was  with  diflSculty  I  could  make  even  a  toler- 
able guess  at  the  drift  of  his  discourse.  There  was  the  same 
complaint,  however,  which  was  no  doubt  made  in  most 
churches  on  the  first  Sunday  in  the  month,  that  there  were 
very  few  recipients  in  the  morning  of  the  sacrament.  Mr 
C  went  with  me;  he  had  never  been  in  a  church  before 
during  the  nine  months  he  had  been  residing  in  Hong-Koog. 
I  am  a  week  too  late  for  the  Australian  boat  from  Oalle, 
and  shall  have  to  remain  in  Ceylon  for  three  weeks.  It  can't 
be  helped. 

Itk. — A  day  in  Macao.  Yesterday  I  got  into  a  steamer 
at  Hong-Kong  at  2  p.m.,  and  at  5.30  p.m.  I  found  myself  in 
the  Royal  Hotel  on  the  "  Praya  Grande  "  at  Macao.  I  soou 
made  the  acquaintance  of  M.  de  Graca,  my  landlord,  a  little 
lame  Macao  Portuguese,  quite  as  pompous  as  he  could  have 


MACAO.  551 

been  had  he  spent  half  his  life  about  the  court  at  Lisbon, 
Five  minutes'  conversation  with  him  and  you  would  have 
believed  his  hotel  to  be  a  most  flourishing  establishment ; 
but,  alas  I  when  I  sat  down  at  the  table-dChSte^  I  found  that 
mine  host  and  myself  had  the  whole  table  to  ourselves.  In 
this  rambling  building  of  a  hotel,  I  was  the  only  guest  I  I 
have  said  this  little  man  was  very  lame ;  I  may  as  well  tell 
how  he  became  so,  as  a  warning  to  others.  He  was  born, 
he  told  me,  with  six  toes  on  one  foot ;  well,  having  one  toe 
more  than  his  due,  he  or  his  father  thought  it  best  to  cut  it 
off,  the  result  was,  that  he  suffered  so  much  and  so  long- 
continued  pain  in  consequence,  that,  in  the  endeavour  to 
find  ease  in  walking,  he  gradually  took  to  walking  on  the 
side  instead  of  on  the  sole  of  his  foot,  and  at  last  his  foot 
turned  almost  completely  over,  and  the  other  foot,  from 
sympathy,  I  suppose,  followed  the  example  set  it,  and 
became  almost  as  turned  as  the  foot  that  had  been  operated 
upon.  This,  of  course,  was  during  childhood,  and  you  now 
find  this  man  a  complete  cripple,  hobbling  about  the  house 
with  difficulty,  even  with  the  help  of  a 'stick.  After  break* 
fast  this  morning,  I  took  with  me  a  young  Chinese  coolie 
who  spoke  English  remarkably  well,  and  was  otherwise  very 
intelligent,  and  sallied  out  to  see  the  wonders  of  Macao. 
Our  first  visit  was  to  the  Government  barracoon,  a  large 
rambling  building,  into  which  coolies  for  exportation  are 
lodged  on  being  brought  from  the  interior  by  men  called 
brokers.  The  Portuguese  officials  behaved  very  courteously, 
and  readily  accompanied  me  all  over  the  building,  explaining 
as  we  proceeded  the  measures  adopted  by  the  Government  to 
secure  to  the  coolies  a  right  to  go  or  to  remain,  and  also 
to  secure  the  proper  fittings  for  their  comfort  on  board  ship, 
regulating  the  numbers  to  be  carried,  and  seeing  that  a 
proper  quantity  of  good  provisions  was  provided  for  them, 
this  last  consisting  of  rice,  fish,  and  pork.  (I  afterwards 
learnt  that  the  provisioning  was  left  entirely  to  the  coolie 
agent.)  One  of  these  gentlemen  spoke  English  fluently; 
he  told  me  that  he  had  a  good  knowledge  of  Chinese,  and 
that  his  duty  there  at  the  barracoon  was  principally  to  be 
present  and  to  see  that  the  coolies  were  brought  one  by  one 
to  be  asked  if  they  went  willingly,  and  to  have  the  nature 


552  MACAO. 

of  their  agreement  explained  to  them,  and  were  not  coerced, 
and  that  a  full  and  proper  explanation  was  made  to  them  of 
the  obligation  they  were  undertaking.  In  one  large  room 
there  were  eighty-five  of  these  coolies  penned  within  a  rail, 
who  had  been  brought  in  from  the  country  only  yesterday. 
Some  of  them  were  stretched  on  the  floor  asleep,  but  generally 
they  were  awake,  and  seemed  to  listen  with  eagerness  to  the 
conversation  we  were  carrying  on,  though  of  course,  they  un- 
derstood not  a  word  of  it ;  they  looked  wretchedly  poor  and 
woe-begone,  and  their  scanty  covering  consisted  of  but  a  few 
rags ;  there  was  a  restless  earnestness  in  their  looks,  which 
said  as  plainly  as  could  be  said  without  the  use  of  words,  '^  Are 
we  right  or  wrong  in  taking  this  leap,  the  consequences  of 
which  are  so  completely  hidden  from  us  ?  '*  Poor  devils  1  I 
thought,  how  little  you  know  what  is  before  you  I  The  vessel 
on  board  which  they  are  to  embark  is  a  sailing  ship  bound 
to  the  Havannah.  I  left  this  room  with  my  conductor,  and 
took  a  seat  in  an  outer  apartment,  where  I  awaited  the 
commencement  of  the  interrogation  the  coolies  had  to  pass 
through,  one  by  one,  as  to  their  willingness  or  unwillingness 
to  embark,  after  having  had  the  nature  of  their  agreement 
explained  to  them.  They  came  in  one  at  a  time.  The 
examiner,  I  was  told,  explained  fully  the  nature  of  their 
agreement  and  then  asked  if  they  were  willing  to  proceed.  I 
waited  until  a  dozen  of  them  had  been  thus  interrogated, 
and  out  of  this  dozen  there  were  four  who  declined  to 
proceed ;  these,  I  was  told,  would  be  returned  to  their  homes 
immediately.  Those  who  agreed  to  proceed  were  *^^  tallied  " 
and  passed  into  another  room.  The  officials  were  very  earnest 
in  endeavouring  to  show  me  what  trouble  the  Gk)vemment 
took  to  insure  good  treatment  to  the  coolies  on  board  ship. 
By  a  late  order  the  agreement  binds  the  shippers  to  pay  them 
passage-money  to  return  after  having  served  eight  years, 
whether  they  really  choose  to  return  to  Macao  or  not  It  is 
not  difficult,  however,  to  understand  that  after  eight  years 
very  few  of  these  coolies  ever  return  to  China.  Some 
15,000  were  shipped  off  from  Macao  last  year,  of  whom,  I 
am  informed,  10,000  went  to  Pern.  But  what  is  all  this 
apparent  desire  worth  on  the  part  of  the  officials  to  secure 
good  treatment  for  the  coolies  in  the  face  of  the  fSEtct  that 


MACAO.  553 

their  Balaries  are  so  miserably  low  that  thej  must  be,  one 
and  all  of  them,  open  to  bribery,  the  Grovernor  himself 
receiying  only  400  dollars  a  month  ?  One  Governor,  I  am 
told,  who  remained  three  years  here,  took  away  with  him 
80,000  dollars,  saved  out  of  his  salary  of  400  dollars  a  month. 
A  dollar  a  head  is  paid  by  the  exporter  to  the  Government 
for  every  coolie  shipped  off  at  Macao,  though  I  am  told  that 
this  represents  only  abont  a  fifth  part  of  what  the  Govern- 
ment really  receives  for  this  traffic.  All  coolies  brought 
from  the  country  remain  three  days  in  the  Government 
barracoon,  and  are  fed  during  that  time  from  the  barracoon 
kitchen,  tiieir  food  being  paid  for  by  the  shipper.  Chinese 
brokers  are  employed  to  engage  coolies  in  the  country  by  the 
agents  for  Havannah  and  Peru  residing  in  Macao,  and  they 
are,  I  am  told,  as  a  class,  of  the  most  unprincipled  character. 
Sixteen  of  these  kidnappers  were  executed  in  Canton  about 
two  months  ago.  If  they  are  unsuccessful  in  procuring 
coolies  otherwise,  they  bribe  the  petty  Mandarins  to  assist 
them,  and  in  this  way  a  species  of  terrorism  is  brought  to 
bear  upon  the  coolies,  which  they  are  ill-qualified  to  with- 
stand; and  so  it  is  that  many  of  those  brought  from  the 
country  object  to  proceed  when  the  question  is  put  to  them 
by  the  qualified  Government  official.  There  are,  however,  in 
all  the  steps  taken,  wheel  within  wheel  at  work,  and  probably, 
if  the  truth  were  known,  very  few  indeed  of  those  who  have 
been  brought  to  Macao  escape  being  shipped  off,  either  by 
fair  or  foul  means ;  for  this  coolie  trade  is  one  in  which  the 
most  unscrupulous  means  are  used  to  obtain  the  desired 
end,* 

♦  See  T.  J.  Hutchinson's  "  Two  Years  in  Peru,"  1847,  Vol.  !.,  for  the 
abominable  Chinese  coolie  trade. 

Died  in  hospital  in  Callao,  from  Ist  January  1871  to  October,  241,  or  80  per 
cent,  in  ten  months.  In  the  *'  middle  passage ''  horn.  Macao,  the  death  rate  has 
reached  26  to  81  per  cent.,  100  days  to  Callao. 

Occasional  mutinies  on  board.  They  are  bound  for  fiye  to  eight  years.  Mr 
H.  observes,  *'  I  cannot  ascertain  that  a  shipment  of  any  back  has  ever  been 
made."  In  1870,  dreadful  cases  occurred  of  burning  of  coolie  ships  bound  to 
Callao ;  normal  loss  of  life  on  board,  7  per  cent. 

From  1860  to  1870,  48,301  Chinese  left  Macao  for  Callao ;  arrived,  88,648 ; 
deaths  on  passage,  4658.  The  ships  were  Peruvian,  French,  Portuguese,  and 
Dutch. 

Generally  contracted  for  eight  years  for  450  dollars  (£75).  During  this 
period  they  receive  thirteen  shillings  per  month  for  food  supplies,  besides  one 
and  a  half  pomids  of  sweet  potatoes  per  day,  rice,  yuca,  and  indian-com. 

President  Pardo  lately  sent  Captain  Qarcia  as  Minister-Plenipotentiary  to 


554  MACAO. 

From  the  baiiaooon  I  visited  a  church  and  a  theatre,  both  of 
them  poor  places,  about  upon  a  par  in  appearance  and  probably 
in  their  acting  also.  The  college  was  the  next  place  to  which 
I  directed  my  steps — ^a  large  old  rambling  building,  in  which 
I  was  told  there  were  a  couple  of  hundred  students.  In  the 
garden  attached  to  it  are  two  of  the  finest  pagoda-trees  I  have 
ever  met  with ;  one  of  them  I  judged  to  be  fifteen  feet  in 
diameter.  From  this  college  I  went  to  see  the  tomb  of 
Gamoens.  It  is  a  plain  stone  pillar,  six  feet  high,  with  a 
bronze  bust  of  the  poet  placed  on  the  top.  It  stands  in  a 
garden  situated  in  the  middle  of  the  city,  a  very  old  garden, 
containing  a  great  variety  of  pine-trees.  A  aonnet  in  Portu- 
guese is  engraved  on  a  tablet  by  the  aide  of  the  tomb,  with 
a  translation  by  Sir  J.  Bowring,  who  was  a  great  admirer  of 
the  poems  of  Gamoens.  I  next  paid  a  visit  to  a  small  josa- 
house.  At  the  very  entrance,  one  on  each  side,  were  two 
fortune-tellers,  well  established  and  firmly,  apparently  part 
and  portion  of  the  joss-house,  and  paying  rent  to  the  priests 
for  their  standings ;  they  were  both  of  them  surrounded  by  a 
crowd  of  votaries,  all  eager  to  know  what  the  future  had  in 
store  for  them.  What  an  anomaly  it  seems  that  a  people  so 
shrewd  in  matters  of  business  as  the  Chinese  undoubtedly 
are  should  be  ingrained  with  the  grossest  superstition  I  I 
now  proceeded  to  a  gambling-house,  where  I  saw  some  dosen 
or  two  anxious  faces  staking  their  chance  of  winning  money 
against  great  odds ;  for  were  it  otherwise,  the  men  who  hold 
the  exclusive  right  to  open  gambling-houses  in  Macao  could 
never  afford  to  pay  the  (Government  170,000  dollars  a  year 
for  it  Until  a  few  years  ago,  the  gambling  license  of 
Macao  yielded  to  the  home  Government  only  10,000  dollars 
a  year ;  it  was  then  given  to  a  Portuguese,  who  sublet  it  to 

China,  to  put  Chinese  emigration  on  a  better  footing.  Chinese  Govenimeot  bat 
recently  forbidden  emigration  to  Peru. 

From  20th  Januaiy  to  20th  December  1873,  32  ships  solelj  engaged  in  thk 
traffic  had  broo^^t  to  Callao  18,380  Chinese  coolies,  having  taken  on  board 
14,494  at  Macao ;  had  died  on  the  Toyage,  1114  or  7rr  P^  cent. 

The  PtuUo  of  Lima  said,  **  We  have  had  in  the  past  and  present  year  broogfat 
to  Peru  25,192  colonists,  representing  for  the  speculaton  in  human  flesh  a  oap^ 
of  £1,759,142,  the  worth  of  each  at  £69,  15s.,  which  is  a  wiinimnm  value» 

There  was  no  provision  in  the  Peruvian  system  for  the  female  elements 

(With  the  white,  Indian,  and  Negro  elements,  add  now  Chinese.  What  strange 
mixtures  will  arise  between  the  male  Chinese  and  female  Indian  and  Negress.) 

I  think  1  have  heard  that  the  Portuguese  Government  haTo  relinquiSied  their 
•uperintendence  of  the  coolies. 


MACAO.  555 

a  Chinaman.  The  Portuguese  has  been  thrust  aside^  and 
the  license  is  given  to  a  Chinaman,  who  pays  for  it  170,000 
dollars  a  year.  In  all,  I  am  told,  there  are  seventeen 
of  these  gambling-houses  in  Macao.  The  ^^  table  "  is  man- 
aged by  four  Chinamen,  one  of  whom  sits  with  a  heap 
of  cash  before  him,  from  which  he  takes  up  a  handful  as 
soon  as  the  stakes  have  been  all  placed,  and  throws  it  down 
in  a  heap  a  foot  or  two  from  him  on  the  table  before  him.  The 
stakes  are  placed  upon  either  or  all  four  figures,  1,  2,  3,  4; 
the  heap  of  copper  cash  is  then  counted,  four  cash  at  a  time 
being  drawn  from  the  heap,  and  the  number  of  cash  over 
1,  2,  3,  4  indicates  the  winning  number  on  the  board.  There 
are  some  advantages  which  the  banker  possesses  I  could  not 
quite  comprehend ;  one  of  them,  however,  is,  that  in  paying 
what  he  loses,  he  takes  to  himself  7  per  cent  of  the  amount. 
No  doubt  the  whole  affair  is  very  demoralising,  for  from  the 
highest  to  the  lowest  of  Chinamen  they  all  engage  in  play. 
As  my  Chinese  boy  remarked,  whether  you  win  or  lose, 
the  result  is  pernicious ;  if  a  servant,  who  is  earning  pro- 
bably four  dollars  a  month,  wins  thirty  or  forty  dollars,  he 
becomes  lazy  and  neglects  his  work ;  if  he  loses,  he  is  pretty 
sure  to  rob  his  master  in  order  to  procure  the  means  of  trying 
hia  luck  another  time. 

A  German^  a  shipbroker,  was  committed  to  take  his  trial 
yesterday  in  Hong-Kong  for  forgery,  altering  certificates  of 
ahares  in  a  public  company,  making  a  certificate  for  one 
share  into  a  certificate  for  a  hundred.  This  man,  last  week 
at  Macao,  in  one  night,  lost  at  a  gaming-table  7()00  dollars* 
But  what  cares  the  Macao  Government  what  harm  this  gam- 
bling may  do,  provided  they  can  get  by  it  170,000  dollars 
per  annum  ? 

The  principal  revenue  of  Macao  is  drawn  from  licenses  to 
houses  of  ill  fame,  gambling-houses,  opium,  smoking  saloons, 
butchers'  shops  (the  Chinese  are  great  consumers  of  pork), 
and  also  from  the  coolie  trade ;  this  last  is  indeed  probably 
the  principal  source  of  their  revenue,  as  it  undoubtedly  is 
the  source  from  which  three-fourths  of  the  population  of 
Macao  derive  a  living. 

Macao  is  built  on  a  long  neck  of  land,  the  town  extending 
across  it,  having  a  port  on  both  sides,  such  as  they  are.    As 


SS6  MACAO. 

the  Bteamer  approaches  from  Hong-Kong,  she  passes  close  to 
the  Praja  OraDde,  aronnd  which,  with  a  broad  drive  between 
it  and  the  beach,  is  a  semicirole  of  European  houses,  two 
or  three  storeys  high,  bnilt  after  the  fashion  of  houses  in 
Lisbon.  The  Gh)yernor*s,  and  many  other  houses,  are  hand- 
some buildings ;  and,  indeed,  the  whole  semicirole  presents 
what  might  be  called  an  imposing  fa9ade,  for  in  its  rear  is 
the  remainder  of  the  town,  extending  all  across  to  the  harbour 
on  the  opposide  side  of  the  strip  of  land.  The  steamer  pro- 
ceeds past  Praya  Grande,  rounds  the  point,  and  enters  the 
western  port,  whero  she  goes  alongside  the  wharl  In  this 
port  we  found  a  Portuguese  corvette,  a  schooner,  with  s 
good  many  junks,  large  and  small.  Vessels  drawing  more 
than  twelve  feet  water  anchor  outside  in  the  roadstead,  at 
a  distance  from  Praya  Grande  of  three  miles  at  least  The 
houses  on  Praya  Grande  aro  for  the  most  part  built  of  stone 
and  brick,  stuccoed,  and  painted  fanciful  colours,  the  jalousies 
and  window  shutters  being  always  green,  with  the  hinges 
and  other  fastenings  always  black.  Many  of  the  shutters 
are  mero  lattice-work,  with  the  interstices  filled  up  with 
thin  pieces  of  mother-of-pearl  shell,  which,  being  translucent 
admits  a  certain  amount  of  light  into  the  apartments — ^at 
least,  I  suppose  this  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  mother-of- 
pearl.  The  Government  buildings  are  all  painted  flesh- 
colour;  not  the  flesh -colour,  however,  of  these  worthies 
hero  in  Macao,  for  they  are  all  verging  on  darkies.  Ten 
little  childron  came  into  the  hotel  to  visit  the  landlord  jnst 
after  I  had  arrived,  and  an  uglier  set  I  have  seldom  seen. 
They  were  merry  little  things  nevertheless,  all  of  them,  down 
to  the  youngest,  a  year  old,  insisted  on  shaking  hands 
with  me.  The  Government  of  Macao  is  puroly  military, 
and  is  in  no  way  identified  with  the  commeroial  or  the 
Macao-Portuguese  population,  not  one  of  which  ever  fills  a 
Government  situation,  all  Government  places  being  filled  by 
Portuguese  from  Lisbon.  This  is  much  complained  of;  for 
it  is  admitted,  I  believe,  that  the  young  fellows  of  Macao  are 
generally  well-behaved  and  clever,  all  speaking  two  or  three 
languages.  They  aro  employed  very  generally  throughout 
the  East,  everjrwhero  but  in  Mieu^o,  in  responsible  sitoa- 
tions  in  English  private  and  public  establishments.    13iej 


HONGKONG,  557 

tell  me  there  are  some  5000  Macao-Portagnese  in  Macao, 
and  some  50,000  Chinese*  My  first  visit  to  this  place  was 
in  1844,  when  I  was  attacked  in  the  street  at  mid-day  and 
robbed  of  a  gold  watch ;  and,  strange  to  say,  by  offering  a 
good  reward  for  it  I  got  it  back  after  it  had  been  in  the 
hands  of  the  Chinese  for  a  whole  twelvemonth  I  The  mili- 
tary here  consists  of  about  500  troops.     Left  Macao  on  8th. 

9^^,  Hong-Kong. — This  morning  I  went  to  the  summit  of 
the  hill  overlooking  the  town  and  port  of  Victoria;  my 
aneroid  makes  it  about  1750  feet  high.  Descended  to  Poke- 
foolum  Tank,  which  covers  about  two  acres,  and  partly  sup- 
plies Victoria  with  water;  thence  on  to  Aberdeen,  a  snug 
little  port  two  miles  from  Pokefoolum  and  six  miles  from 
Victoria,  where  there  are  two  docks,  each  some  400  feet 
long,  one  of  them  with  25  feet  water  at  spring  tides  and 
the  other  19  feet.  The  mouths  of  the  docks  are  closed  by 
caissons  instead  of  gates.  These  docks  belong  to  a  com- 
pany, and  have  not,  I  believe,  been  found  to  be  a  profitable 
investment. 

\Zth. — At  noon  to-day,  in  the  French  mail  steamer  PeikOy 
I  left  Hong-Kong  for  Saigon  and  Singapore.  The  Peiho  is 
a  barque-rigged  steamer  of  3500  tons  register,  one  of  the 
finest  of  the  Messagerie  fleet,  and  has  accommodation  for  127 
first-class  passengers,  40  second,  and  50  third.  For  deck 
passengers  there  is  abundance  of  room  also.  The  passage  to 
Singapore  ought  to  be  made  in  seven  days,  and  I  pay  114 
dollars  passage-money.  In  the  principal  saloon,  where  150 
people  might  dine  comfortably,  we  sat  down  to-day  only  a 
dozen  passengers.    What  odd  fish  there  are  in  the  world  I 

On  more  than  one  occasion,  when  calling  on  Mr  B ,  and 

not  finding  him  in  the  office,  I  came  into  contact  with  his 
only  clerk,  a  little  fat  man,  about  forty,  with  a  dash  of  Indian 
or  Macao  blood  in  his  veins.  Yesterday,  when  talking  with 
him,  he  all  at  once  asked  me  if  I  had  heard  of  the  disclosures 
which  were  being  made  at  Hong-Kong.  Believing  that  he 
alluded  to  disclosures  affecting  the  credit  of  some  of  the 
merchants  of  the  place,  I  said,  '^  No,  I  had  not  heard  of 
them ;  what  were  they  ?  whose  credit  did  they  affect  ?  "  "  Oh,'* 
he  said ;  ^^  I  don't  mean  that  at  all ;  I  mean  disclosures  which 
are  proving  the  existence  of  another  world,  and  making 


SS8  SAIGON. 

known  the  thoughts  and  motived  of  every  human  being/* 
**  How,"  i  asked,  "  is  this  being  done  ?"  He  replied,  "  By 
means  of  electricity,  electrical  machines,  and  electrical  glasses. 
The  Government  is  at  work  with  this  power."  **  Well,"  I 
said,  "  this  must  give  them  great  power  indeed/'  "  Yes," 
he  said,  ^^but  they  are  by  it  proved  to  be  great  colprits 
themselves.  I  hear  voices  myself,"  he  said,  ^^  now ;  they  talk 
in  French  too."  ^^  Well,"  I  said,  ^^  but  this  is  spiritoalism, 
and  yon  must  be  a  medium ;  but  I  never  before  heard  of  any 
but  female  mediums."  **  Oh,  yes,"  he  replied,  "  that  is  the 
roguery  of  the  spiritualists.  Great  things  are  about  to  be 
accomplished."  At  this  moment  Mr  B.'8  footstep  was 
heard  on  the  stair.  ^^  Frfty^  don't,"  he  said,  ^^  mention  this 
matter  at  all  to  Mr  B."  Now,  I  have  had  before  several 
conversations,  always  on  ordinary  subjects,  with  this  little 
man,  and  nothing  had^  ever  fallen  from  him  to  make  me 
suspect  that  his  noddle  contained  any  other  notions  than  those 
of  a  most  matter-of-fact  business  person.  He  seemed  to  be 
always  very  steady  at  his  work  in  the  office ;  he  was  indeed 
the  only  clerk,  and  it  seemed  impossible  that  his  employer 
could  have  entertained  the  slightest  idea  that  he  was  imbued 
with  such  extraordinary  notions ;  but  so  it  is ;  and  as  I  left 
the  little  man,  I  could  not  but  ponder  over  the  curious  inter- 
view I  had  had  with  him,  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  we 
know  little  or  nothing  of  the  inward  thoughts  of  the  majority 
of  the  people  we  meet  with  as  we  journey  through  life. 

\6th^  Saigon. — ^At  2  p.m.  we  anchored  in  Saigon,  having 
made  a  run,  during  the  last  twenty-four  hours,  of  330  miles. 
I  have  just  returned  from  a  drive  to  the  Chinese  town,  four 
miles  off,  and  also  from  a  visit  to  an  embryo  menagerie, 
situated  in  the  centre  of  a  piece  of  ground  destined  to 
become,  one  of  these  days,  the  public  gardens  of  Saigon.  A 
bear,  two  or  three  monkeys,  half-a-dozen  deer,  a  peacock  or 
two,  and  a  very  fine  tiger,  one  of  the  largest  and  most  for- 
midable I  have  ever  seen.  There  is  a  good  road  to  the 
Chinese  town,  which  is  more  or  less  what  it  was  when  I  saw 
it  four  years  ago ;  then  it  was  a  busy  place,  to-day  there  was 
but  little  bustle  in  it,  and  both  visits  were  made  in  the  same 
month.  The  cultivation,  too,  on  the  four  miles  of  plain 
between  the  port  and  the  native  town  has  not  increased ;  in 


SAIGON.  559 

fact,  with  the  exception  of  a  large  unfinished  hotel,  and  some 
residences  for  Gk)vernment  officials,  which  have  been  erected 
since  my  first  visit,  and  a  *^  Palais  de  Justice,"  the  settle- 
ment is,  in  appearance,  about  what  it  then  was.  The  French 
houses  are  more  or  less  like  third  or  fourth  class  houses  in  and 
around  Paris ;  they  have  none  of  them  verandahs — a  style 
always  adopted  in  our  Chinese  settlements  where  space  will 
permit,  and  always  in  India — a  style  that  gives  a  nice  cool 
look  to  the  buildings,  and  is  admirably  suited  to  warm 
climates. 

There  is  a  German  gentleman,  belonging  to  an  American 
missionary  society,  on  board  this  boat,  who  has  passed  the 
last  seven  years  in  China — two  years  at  Pekin,  and  five  at 
Hong-Kong.  He  gives  but  a  beggarly  account  of  the  result 
of  his  efforts  to  turn  Chinamen  into  Christians ;  it  amounts 
to  the  baptism  of  twenty-four  adults,  some  of  whom,  he 
thinks,  may  or  may  not  be  Christians.  The  fact  is,  he  says, 
the  Chinese  are  totally  indifferent  to  the  matter  of  religion 
at  all,  whether  it  be  their  own  or  anybody  else^s.  They  are 
the  most  tolerant  people  in  the  world ;  they  cannot  be  said 
to  have  any  religion.  If  this  gentleman  had  had  a  mind  to 
help  them  in  worldly  matters,  he  might  have  made  any  number 
of  converts — a  conversion  that  would  have  lasted  as  loDg  as 
the  worldly  help  lasted,  and  no  longer.  On  more  occasions 
than  one,  when  he  thought  he  had  secured  an  attentive 
listener  when  expounding  the  truths  of  the  Christian  religion, 
his  promised  convert  had  dispelled  the  illusion  by  abruptly 
asking  what  money  he  was  going  to  give  him;  and  on 
receiving  a  reply,  that  his  conversion  to  Christianity  would 
confer  a  much  greater  benefit  on  him  than  mere  worldly 
goods,  he  always  received  this  answer,  "  Oh,  but  how  can 
your  religion  be  better  than  mine,  if  it  does  not  give  us  more 
rice  ?  "  Many  times,  when  preaching  to  a  Chinese  congre- 
gation, and  when  he  really  believed  he  had  secured  attention 
to  his  subject,  one  of  his  hearers  would  approach  him,  and 
putting  his  finger  on  his  black  cloth  coat,  would  ask  him  how 
much  it  had  cost  him  ?  or  he  would  put  his  finger  on  his  spec- 
tacles, and  ask  if  the  rim  was  gold  or  brass  ?  On  being  told 
that  these  were  matters  about  which  they  ought  not  to  occupy 
their  thoughts  when  he  was  preaching  to  them,  they  would 


S6o  SAIGON. 

laaghu  They  were  always  ready,  he  said,  to  langh,  either  at 
their  own  priests  or  at  him ;  ready  to  torn  either  into  ridi* 
cole.  There  are  many  things,  however,  in  which  Christians 
might  with  advantage  follow  the  example  set  them  by  the 
Chinese.  One  of  them  is,  in  their  behaviour  towards  their 
elders,  I  mean  the  elders  of  their  own  family.  First  of  all 
comes  the  oldest  member  of  the  family ;  he,  so  long  as  he 
lives,  is  looked  np  to  and  revered  as  the  head  of  the  honse. 
The  first  duty  of  children  is  to  look  to  the  well-being  of  their 
parents  :  they  may  starve  themselves,  but  the  parents  must 
be  taken  care  of  as  long  as  they  are  alive,  and  their  memory 
is  invariably  honoured  after  their  death.  A  child  who  was 
known  to  lift  his  hand  against  his  parent  would  certainly 
suffer  death ;  and  a  child  who  had  caused  the  death  of  a 
parent  would  be  cut  into  a  thousand  pieces.  Filial  piety  is 
practised  in  China  to  an  extent  unknown',  I  think,  in  any 
other  country  in  the  world.  Upon  the  death  of  the  parents, 
the  eldest  son  commands  the  respect  and  obedience  of  aU  the 
younger  branches  of  the  family. 

2\9t. — On  the  19thy  at  5  p.m.,  we  anchored  at  the  new  bar* 
hour  of  Singapore,  having  been  three  days  in  coming  from 
Saigon;  a  strong  N.E.  monsoon  all  the  way.  Coaled  and 
took  in  some  cargo,  and  added  about  a  dozen  Dutchmen  to 
our  previous  complement  of  passengers.  At  4  p.m.  yesterday 
we  were  again  en  route^  and  have  been  running  along  ever  since 
with  perfectly  smooth  water,  and  at  a  speed  that  promises 
to  land  us  at  Galle  on  25th  inst. ;  distance  from  Singiqiore 
to  Ghdle,  about  1 500  miles.  Since  yesterday,  we  have  come, 
up  to  noon,  250  miles  in  twenty  hours.  Heavy  showers  of 
rain  to-day ;  but  the  Straits  are  proverbial  for  rain.  Ther- 
mometer in  my  cabin  82''  and  86\ 

2Atk. — The  last  twenty-four  hours  we  have  made  a  run  of 
327  miles,  and  yesterday  a  run  of  338  miles,  and  having 
now  only  270  to  do,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  before 
noon  to-morrow  we  shall  be  at  anchor  in  Galle.  We  have 
two  Catholic  priests  and  two  sisters  of  mercy,  passengers  for 
Marseilles,  all  four  of  them  invalided  from  Saigon;  they 
give  me  a  wretched  account  of  the  insalubrity  of  the  dimate  of 
that  Cochin-China  settlement ;  the  tale,  in  fact,  is  told  in  all 
four  ^Jkmr  £ues.     I  have  been  questioning  one  of  the 


CONVERTS.  56 1 

priests  about  his  success  in  making  converts  among  the 
Annanites ;  he  says  they  have  a  congregation  at  Saigon  of 
upwards  of  twenty  thousand.  He  tells  me  there  have  been 
days  when  he  has  been  tired  to  death,  almost  unable  to  lift 
his  hand  to  continue  making  the  sign  of  the  cross,  in  per- 
forming the  operation  of  baptism  upon  these  heathens. 
They  present  a  tabida  rasuj  he  says,  to  the  Christian 
minister;  they  have  no  religion  of  their  own  beyond  their 
ancestral  worship.  I  suspect,  however,  there  is  little  dif- 
ference in  this  respect  between  the  Chinese  and  the  Annan- 
ites. Nevertheless,  it  would  seem,  by  their  own  accounts, 
that  whilst  our  American  missionary  in  seven  years  has 
found  only  twenty-four  Chinese  willing  to  submit  to 
baptism,  the  French  Romish  priest  within  four  years  has 
brought  within  the  fold,  by  making  the  sign  of  the  cross, 
some  20,000  Annanites  I  These  Annanites  are  admitted  to 
be  excessively  lazy  fellows;  in  this  particular,  at  any 
rate,  in  no  way  resembling  the  Chinese.  Perhaps  the  reason 
is  that  they  do  not  wear  tails.  There  really  may  be  some- 
thing in  a  Chiuaman's  tail.  At  any  rate,  he  would  almost 
prefer  parting  with  his  life  to  parting  with  his  tail. 


2  N 


CHAPTER  XXIL 

<M1«-B*lwl  of  toiim«»-Trip  in  »ta«niar  round  Ceylon- TrmBimileo—Jifa*- 
Funnbar  Put-Eufonution  for  DuTrio— Oolonibo-Bre»kw»ter  inP«i^E!r" 
— ProtaiUnt  wid  (ktholio  miHioDuiM  {  the  Uitat  more  nuK»Mfnl--U«u«  • 
nlled  toWD— BlaphuU-To  Melbonrae— Detth  on  ba»rd-;Kuig  Oei««i 
SoDiid— Albuij— Nati«e*~CoDTiot>— Hiitnra  of  powngMi— Tmntm*- va 
^  lAud  Oon^anj'a  propm^— Tin  min««— lV«mw«i;— HobMt  Tow»— 


Now  Horiolk-aJmon  pond»-5fin«  Hila  BpriMi— Iron  min««— Mtlbomie- 
Sandbiuirt— OunbUuB  in  gold  dunn— KMdiiu  of  Dickeni  bjr  Baptat  nmuw 
— PioturoOJloiT— FftnojOudedB— W«jrnunbod-Kohioa— Fwiiuii«-Wip« 
—Tower  HiU-I«ke  eeU— GMlmu-Sqiuttere  the  lordi  of  the  ioa— DetrimeDttl 
to  fumeiB— "  Leg!  "-HiB  Tnmer'i  OniUrUn  Chniok— Biihop  P0117— L««»- 
Ulive  AMemblj— UniTerdtT  mawQin— Uetoorita-Boimd  loiQtitt-Utai 
killod-C»biiii  oramnukl  with  ouio— De»th  on  boeri- Aden— The  tu>ta-^u- 
MDger  drops  down  dnwl— Baflaodoui— Bodj  couigned  to  the  dMp  at  S  1.11. ; 
a  oonoatt  ■(  8  P.M. — Suai  Canal— Some. 

26th  April.— At  9.30  yesterday  we  anchored  at  Galle.  Since 
then,  flteamerB  hare  arrlTed  from  France,  Calcattii,  and 
AtiBtralia,  and  the  Oriental  Hot«l,  filled  by  the  passeogen, 
has  become  a  Babel  of  tongaes ;  and  the  Cingaleee  jewellers, 
workers  in  tortoise-shell  and  ivory,  fancy  woods  and  porcn- 
pine-quill  boxes,  have  been  making  a  rare  harvest.  For 
myself,  I  spend  no  money  at  present  among  them.  I  have 
twenty  days  yet  before  I  embark  for  my  destination,  eight 
or  ten  of  which  I  shall  tide  over  in  a  trip  1  am  aboot  to  take 
in  the  colonial  steamer  Serindib,  Captain  Varian,  ronod  the 
island  hence  to  Colombo,  calling  at  Hambantotto,  Batticolso, 
Trincomalee,  Point  Pedro,  Jaffua,  and  Paumber  on  the  way, 
for  which  I  have  paid  130  rupees  passage-money.  I  embark 
to-night,  and  start  in  the  morning  at  dayligbt. 

MarcA  Zd. — On  the  27th  we  got  under  way  at  6  A-il,  and 
at  noon,  or  a  little  later,  we  anchored  off  Hambantotto, 
about  two  niilea  frtrni  the  eliore.  There  was  more  than  the 
nHUal  amount  of  mirf  on  the  beach,  caused  perhaps  by 
tlic  new  mooD ;  and  as  I  nDderstood  there  was  really 
nothing  to  ta  teen,  and  tho  captain  did  not  land,  I  n- 
maioed  QffJd|i^^W^|[^grettBO.  for  this  port,  so  sfter 
^ticked  np  drifting 


HA  MBANTOTTO—BA  TTICOLA  0.  563 

to  sea  with  no  one  ou  board,  and  receiving  200  sacks  coffee 
from  the  Duffer  estate,  an  operation  which  occupied  us 
nearly  all  the  afternoon,  we  up  anchor,  and  sped  on  our 
way  towards  Batticolao,  off  which  port  we  anchored  about 
10  A.M.  The  Duffee  estate  is  the  only  one  from  which  coffee 
is  received  at  Hambantotto,  the  chief  business  of  the  popula- 
tion of  the  district  being  the  gathering  of  salt  from  the  flat 
sandy  land  a  mile  or  two  distant  from  the  shore.  I  am  told 
the  salt  water  percolates  through  the  hillocks  on  the  shore, 
and  oozes  up  to  the  surface  of  a  flat  that  might  be  called  the 
salt-pans,  and  is  there  scraped  off  as  fast  as  it  rises,  which  is 
continuously.  There  are  only  two  or  three  Europeans  resi- 
dent at  Hambantotto. 

At  Batticolao  we  anchored  in  five  fathoms  water,  two  miles 
off  the  bar,  from  which  up  to  the  town  is  about  four  miles. 
We  landed  in  the  steam-launch,  towing  one  of  the  ship's 
boats,  in  which  were  a  revenue  officer  and  his  family,  whom 
we  brought  from  Galle,  where  he  had  been  on  leave.  His 
children  must  have  been  very  thankful  to  get  on  shore,  for 
they  suffered  severely  from  sea-sickness.  Once  over  the  bar, 
we  might  be  said  to  be  in  the  river,  which  reaches  up  some 
thirty  or  forty  miles,  and  is  in  all  its  length  navigable  for 
native  boats.  The  town  of  Batticolao  is  situated  on  an  island 
connected  by  a  bridge  with  the  mainland,  that  is,  the  main- 
land of  Ceylon.  The  town  proper  is  a  small  place,  but  the 
island  is  of  considerable  extent,  and  covered  with  bungalows, 
literally  buried  in  a  dense  growth  of  the  cocoa-nut  palm; 
indeed,  the  principal  export  from  Batticolao  is  coprerah,  or 
dried  cocoa-nut>  sent  to  Colombo,  where  the  oil  is  expressed 
from  it.  The  outside  of  the  cocoa-nut  is  also  shipped  to 
Colombo  to  be  turned  into  coir-rope.  Why  the  operations  of 
expressing  the  oil  and  making  the  rope  should  not  be  per- 
formed on  the  spot  is  difficult  to  understand,  for  the  machi- 
nery required  for  the  purpose  is  very  insignificant  in  cost ; 
but  so  it  is,  and  we  have  brought  with  us  from  Colombo  a 
goodly  number  of  coils  of  coir-rope  for  the  consumption  of 
the  district  of  Batticolao,  which  contains  a  population  of 
some  20,000  souls.  I  put  up  at  a  Government  rest-house. 
The  building  is  well  enough  for  a  climate  where  the  thermo- 
meter is  seldom  so  low  as  SO"*  (now  it  gets  up  in  the  shade 


S64  BATTJCOLAO. 

to  86^)y  being  provided  with  a  roomy  corridor  and  large  win- 
dows and  doors,  always  open  of  course.  Old  Johnson ,  who  keeps 
it,  knows  how  to  cook,  and  fish,  chickens,  and  eggs  may  always 
be  had  in  the   market.    This    GK>yernment  establishment, 
however,  in  which  a  charge  of  fifty  cents  is  made  a  night  for 
a  stretcher,  is  totally  unprovided  with  sheets,  pillows,  towels, 
tablecloths,  or  mosquito-cnrtains.    Sheets,  tablecloths,  and 
towels  Johnson  hires  at  a  penny  a  piece  from  the  washerman, 
but  mosquito-curtains  are  not  to  be  had  from  the  washerman ; 
and  as  mosquitos  abound,  the  unfortunate  mortal  may  seek 
rest,  but  certainly  does  not  find  it    The  Gk)vernment  is  rich 
enough  to  spend  £50  to  build  a  rest-house,  but  there  it  stops 
short ;  it  would  be  too  much  to  ask  for  a  further  outlay  often 
shillings  for  mosquito-curtains,  notwithstanding  that  the  rest- 
house  is  built  in  the  jungle,  where  these  pests  abound.     For 
cutlery  and  spoons  the  establishment  is  not  badly  ofi^,  a  carv- 
ing knife  and  a  fork  having  been  lately  bought  at  an  auction ; 
and  all  told,  there  are  three  tea-spoons  and  some  large  spoons, 
that  might  be  mistaken  for  gold,  so  yellow  and  so  very  at- 
tenuated are  they.     I  am  afraid  to  say  how  many  plates  and 
dishes  there  are ;  but  as  I  was  the  only  visitor,  there  were 
sufficient  for   me :  had  I  had  a  companion,  matters  might 
have  been  different.     The  roads  everywhere  in  the  immediate 
neighbourhood  are  excellent,  and  there  is  no  limit  to  such 
shade  as  the  cocoa-nut  palm  can  give.     The  pagoda-tree  and 
the  banyan-tree  are  numerous  and  very  fine.     The  teta-tree, 
which  produces  a  berry  used  extensively  in  making  cooling 
drinks,  is  a  large  shady  tree.     There  is  a  great  variety  of  the 
butterfly  and  beetle  tribe  to  be  met  with  here.     Fish  is 
abundant,  and  crabs  and  prawns  are  in  overwhelming  quan- 
tities.    The  famous  singing-fish  is  here  (if  it  be  anywhere), 
but  I  have  never  heard  of  any  one  who  had  seen  it     Some 
say  it  is  a  shell-fish,  but  what  sort  of  fish  it  really  is,  nobody 
seems  to  know.     Cocoa-nuts  sell  for  six  shillings  a  hundred. 
Neither  beef  nor  mutton  to  be  had  at  the  rest-house.     The 
weather  has  been  fine,  and  the  N.W.   monsoon  very  gentle 
ever  since  we  left  Oalle,  the  thermometer  ranging  between  80"" 
and  86""  during  the  twenty-four  hours. 

3^ — Yesterday  at  noon  we  anchored  in  the  splendid  har- 
bour of  Trincomalee,  seven  hours  from  Batticolaa      Found 


TRINCOMALEE.  565 

H.M.  corvette  Columbine  here,  two  Italian  barques,  and  a  . 
Norwegian.  One  of  the  Italians  put  in  here  from  stress  of 
weather  in  September  last,  and  has  been  here  ever  since  dis- 
charging her  cargo  of  rice,  caulking  all  over  and  coppering, 
and  taking  on  board  her  rice  again.  She  is  from  Bangoon, 
bound  to  England.  This  inner  harbour  of  Trincomalee  is 
entirely  landlocked,  and  capable  of  holding  all  the  British 
navy,  and  two  or  three  other  European  navies  besides.  I  went 
round  it  partly  to-day  in  the  SerindiVs  steam-launch,  with 
Captain  Yarian,  accompanied  by  the  Government  agent  for 
the  eastern  district,  Mr  Hume,  and  with  the  agent  at  Trin- 
comalee, Mr.Moir.  We  steamed  for  two  hours  and  a  half, 
merely  looking  into  the  several  arms  of  this  inner  harbour; 
and  as  we  were  steaming  the  whole  time  at  the  rate  of  seven 
miles  an  hour,  we  must  have  gone  over  nearly  eighteen  miles 
of  ground.  The  distance  along  the  shore  of  this  inner  har- 
bour, with  all  its  arms  and  bays,  I  calculate  to  be  good  forty 
miles,  all  landlocked,  and  generally  with  water  everywhere  suf- 
ficient to  float  the  largest  vessel  in  the  world.  In  fact,  there 
can  be  no  finer  harbour,  and  it  is  lamentable  to  see  it  made 
of  so  little  or  no  use,  on  an  island  which  does  not  possess  any 
other  harbour,  and  where  the  Colonial  Government  is,  they  say, 
about  to  expend  something  like  a  million  of  money  in  build- 
ing a  breakwater  at  Colombo  I  Walked  up  with  Captain 
Yarian  yesterday  to  the  fort.  It  stands,  with  the  barracks, 
on  rising  ground,  and  on  still  higher  ground,  and  above  the 
fort,  is  the  signal-station,  and  close  to  the  signal-station, 
on  a  rock  at  the  point  overlooking  a  perpendicular  cliff,  some 
150  feet  above  the  sea,  stands  a  pillar,  erected  by  the  Dutch 
200  years  ago,  commemorating  a  very  sad  event,  the  death 
of  a  daughter  of  the  then  Governor,  who  threw  herself  over 
the  cliff,  and  was  drowned  or  dashed  to  pieces  on  the  rocks 
below !     A  love  affair  1 

In  Back  Bay  ships  frequently  anchor  during  the  S.W. 
monsoon  under  a  weather  shore.  At  one  time  Trincomalee 
was  said  to  be  very  unhealthy ;  now,  however,  it  has  a  better . 
character,  and  the  place  is,  doubtless,  as  healthy  as  any  spot 
on  the  coast.  Went  over  Admiralty  House  and  grounds ;  a 
comfortable  residence.  I  saw  there  the  most  wide-spreading 
banyan-tree  I  had  met  with.     Its  shadow,  at  noon,  embraces 


S66  POINT  PEDRO. 

a  circle  of  nearly,  if  not  quite,  400  feet  There  are  some  very 
large  tamarind-trees  also  on  the  coast.  One  that  I  saw  most 
have  measured  good  fourteen  feet  in  diameter  ;  and  I  am  told 
there  are  some  very  much  larger.  There  is  an  avenue  of  tulip- 
trees  running  up  from  the  town  to  the  fort.  The  oleander 
grows  everywhere,  as  does  also  a  large  periwinkle,  bearing 
a  pink  flower.  The  low  hills  encircling  the  harbour  are 
entirely  covered  with  trees,  and  at  the  base  is  a  belt  of  cocoa- 
nut  palms.  Fish  is  everywhere  abundant,  and  large  quanti- 
ties of  shells  are  taken,  and  cleaned,  and  arranged  in  satin- 
wood  drawers,  and  sold  to  visitors,  or  sent  off  to  the  other  parts 
of  the  island,  where  purchasers  are  more  easily  met  with. 
Trincomalee  itself  is  a  very  dead-and-alive  place,  and  be- 
yond a  few  tons  monthly  of  ebony  logs,  nothing  is  shipped 
there.  Rice  and  cotton,  might,  no  doubt,  be  cultivated  with 
advantage  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  and  very  likely 
sugar  also.  It  really  seems  a  monstrous  pity  that  so  fine  a 
port  should  not  be  utilised. 

^tk, — Yesterday  at  8  p.m.  we  steamed  away  from  Trin- 
comalee by  the  light  of  a  moon  six  days  old,  assisted  by 
Venus,  shining  as  she  shines  nowhere  but  in  the  tropics. 
Jupiter  also  lent  his  aid  to  enable  us  to  steer  clear  of 
rocks  and  shoals.  At  9  a.m.  we  anchored  off  Point  Pedro. 
We  had  ne  cargo  for  this  little  port,  either  to  land  or  to 
receive ;  nevertheless,  we  are  anchored  there  in  seven  fathoms 
water,  at  less  than  half  a  mile  from  the  beach,  in  front  of  the 
town.  Landed  and  walked  over  the  place.  From  the  anchor- 
age the  only  buildings  visible  were  the  Government  bunga- 
lows, well  backed  up  by  cocoa-nut  palms  and  other  trees; 
but  there  is  a  considerable  native  town  here,  composed  of 
several  straight  and  wide  streets,  and  a  large  square  or  mar- 
ket-place ;  the  inhabitants  are  Tamils,  or  of  Tamil  extraction. 
The  men  whom  we  saw,  without  exception,  were  all  loung- 
ing about  idle,  or  sitting  upon  their  heels,  whilst  the 
women,  young  and  old,  were  employed  in  unloading  paddy, 
and  carrying  it  to  a  granary  in  baskets  upon  their  heads ;  and 
in  carrying  down  to  the  beach  for  embarkation  heavy  slabs 
of  the  palmyra  palm-tree,  the  wood  of  which  is  very  durable. 
Yes,  without  exception,  every  woman  we  saw — ^and  among  them 
were  many  delicate  young  things  of  good  figures  and  chiseled 


JAFFNA.  567 

features — were  staggering  under  the  weight  of  heavy  palmyra 
slabs  carried  upon  their  heads.  It  really  was  a  thing  to 
remark,  that,  of  hundreds  of  men  whom  we  saw,  not  one  but 
was  idle,  and  of  the  women,  not  one  but  was  at  work.  They 
tell  me  that  it  is  a  peculiarity  of  the  native  men  of  Point 
Pedro  that  they  do  no  hard  work,  leaving  that  to  be  per- 
formed by  the  women,  and  that  they  are  much  addicted  to 
gambling.  There  is  no  European  resident  at  Point  Pedro, 
unless  the  missionary  be  one,  about  which  I  am  not  quite 
sure.  At  any  rate,  the  arrival  of  the  Serindib  did  not  bring 
either  him  or  the  police  magistrate  (who  is  a  native)  out  of 
their  dens,  although  she  is  the  only  steamer  that  ever  comes 
near  the  place.  This  climate  of  the  tropics  makes  men  very 
apathetic.  It  is  now  noon,  and  we  are  on  our  way  to  Ja£fna, 
which  we  shall  hardly  have  sufiBcient  daylight  to  reach.  Fine 
calm  sea,  and  light  N.K  monsoon. 

6th. — We  anchored  off  Jaffna  at  5  p.m.  yesterday  (six 
miles),  and  this  morning  went  on  shore  in  the  steam- 
launch,  having  in  places  to  force  our  way  through  the  mud, 
BO  shallow  is  the  water  on  nearing  the  town.  With  Captaia 
Yarian  I  visited  the  fort  left  to  us  by  the  Dutch.  It  was 
built  by  a  disciple  of  Yauban,  and  is  considered,  I  believe, 
by  military  men,  to  be  perfect  in  its  way.  All  around  there 
are  embrasures  for  guns  bearing  upon  every  accessible  part  of 
the  approach  to  the  stone  walls.  The  whole  is  in  a  good 
state  of  preservation,  surrounded  by  a  wide  moat  still  filled 
with  water ;  and  except  on  this  side  close  down  to  the  large 
shallow  lake,  is  entirely  surrounded  by  a  really  extensive 
esplanade,  sloping  away  very  gently  from  the  base  of  the 
walls.  Inside  this  fort  are  a  Dutch  church,  a  large  range 
of  bungalows  called  the  Queen's  House,  usually  occupied  by 
distinguished  visitors,  and  the  residence  of  most  of  the 
Government  civil  officers,  and,  I  believe,  by  some  other 
Europeans  also,  of  whom,  all  told,  there  are  not  above  a 
dozen  men  and  women,  living  in  Jaffna  in  the  ifiidst  of  a 
large  Tamil  population,  apparently  with  a  feeling  of  perfect 
security,  and  without  the  protection  of  a  single  soldier.  In- 
side the  walls  of  the  fort  is  a  banyan-tree  much  reverenced 
by  the  natives.  The  main  trunk  must  be  fourteen  feet  in 
diameter,  and  the  descending  tendrils  have  been  carefully 


568  JAFFNA. 

helped  iu  their  downward  growth,  and  amount  to  some 
hundreds,  firmly  rooted  to  the  groond,  serring  to  feed  the 
hnge  bulk  of  the  tree,  and  at  the  same  time  acting  as  props 
to  the  main  branches  or  arms,  which  extend  more  or  less 
some  fifty  feet  on  every  side  from  the  main  tmnk.  This 
hnge  tree  may  be  sixty  feet  in  height,  well  clothed  with 
leaves,  and  is  a  remarkable  object,  seen*  from  every  part  of 
the  walls  of  the  fort  At  night  this  tree  becomes  tiie  sleep- 
ing-place of  millions,  or  at  any  rate,  I  may  say  of  hundredH 
of  thousands,  of  crows  (rooks?),  who  arrive  as  night  approaches 
in  flocks  from  all  parts  of  the  surrounding  country — part  of 
each  flock,  if  it  be  a  large  one,  going  right  to  the  big  tree, 
and  part  of  it  resting  for  a  minute  or  two  only  on  some 
neighbouring  tulip-trees,  apparently  to  give  the  first  part  of  the 
flock  time  to  settle  down,  and  then  taking  flight  and  following. 
I  watched  the  whole  operation  for  an  hour.  The  tendrils  of 
this  big  tree  that  have  come  down  and  taken  root  in  the 
soil  are  numerous,  large,  and  twisted,  and  put  me  in  mind 
of  the  clusters  of  pillars  that  one  sometimes  sees  in  the 
Oothic  churches  of  Europe.  In  the  afternoon  again,  with 
Captain  Varian,  I  drove  to  Oucharree,  the  residence  of  the 
Oovernment  agent  It  is  a  pretty  little  place,  the  grounds 
like  a  small  English  park,  and  the  gardens  containing  a 
variety  of  fruit  and  other  trees,  from  which  I  was  courteously 
permitted  to  bring  away  seeds.  This  little  oasis  in  the 
desert  is  the  work  of  Mr  Dyke,  a  former  Government  agent 
at  Jaffna.  The  walks  and  drives  about  Jaffna — I  mean  th^ 
roads — are  very  good  and  numerous.  The  place,  in  fact,  is 
attractive  to  some  people  at  least,  for  there  is  one  American 
missionary  here,  eighty  years  of  age,  who  has  been  here 
nearly  all  .his  life,  and  another,  who  goes  passenger  with 
us  to  Colombo,  has  been  here  for  some  thirty  years. 
The  climate  is  good,  though  very  warm  from  February 
to  May.  The  rainy  season  lasts  from  October  to  February, 
and  but  little  rain  falls  during  the  other  months  of  the  year. 
A  good  deal  of  tobacco,  but  of  inferior  quality,  is  grown 
by  the  natives  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  is  sldpped  here 
principally  to  India,  and  some  coperah  is  also  shipped  here. 
For  the  carrying  on  of  large  operations,  however,  there  is 
a  great  dearth  of  labour.    The  Oriental  Bank  has  a  branch 


PA  UMBER  PASS,  569 

here^  managed  by  Mr  Carmichael.     Thermometer  in  the  rest- 
house  88^ 

%th. — ^At  5  P.M.  we  came  on  board  the  Serindibj  after 
a  hard  tussle  to  get  through  the  mud  immediately  after 
leaving  the  beach  at  Jaffna,  bringing  with  us  in  the  gig 
towed  by  the  steam-launch  several  passengers  for  Colombo. 
At  5.30  this  morning  we  got  under  way,  and  at  noon  we  had 
taken  a  pilot  on  board,  and  were  proceeding  through  the 
Paumber  Pass,  where  we  had  in  many  places  barely  sufficient 
water,  though  we  draw  only  ten  and  a  half  feet  aft.  The 
soundings  all  through  the  channel,  about  two  miles  in  length, 
ranged  from  eleven  to  eighteen  feet.  There  might  be  a  mile 
and  a  half  of  water  across  from  shore  to  shore,  but  only  a 
very  narrow  channel  where  the  water  was  deep  enough  for 
our  steamer.  The  distance  that  would  have  to  be  dredged — ^for 
it  might  all  be  dredged — is  in  a  straight  line  somewhat  less 
than  one  mile.  Many  small  vessels  were  passing  through 
when  we  reached  the  channel ;  and  it  struck  me  as  I  looked 
at  it,  that  a  channel  for  large  vessels  would  long  ago  have 
been  made  had  the  neighbouring  countries  of  Ceylon  and 
India  belonged  to  any  European  power  but  to  England.  It 
would  to  some  extent  utilise  the  grand  and  now  almost  useless 
harbour  of  Trihcomalee,  at  the  same  time  that  it  would 
shorten  very  materially  the  passage  from  Calcutta  to  Bombay 
and  the  Bay  of  Bengal  generally.  The  engineer,  Mr  Robin- 
son, who  surveyed  the  pass,  proposed  a  line  for  the  canal 
which  would  make  the  length  of  it  nearly  double  what  I  have 
mentioned;  but  why  he  selected  that  line,  which  would 
necessitate  a  good  deal  of  pick-and-shovel  labour,  which 
would  be  avoided  by  taking  a  straight  line  from  the  entrance 
of  the  existing  channel  on  the  Bay  of  Bengal  side,  I  cannot 
understand.  There  is  a  large  temple  on  the  Ceylon  side  of 
the  pass,  which  appears  to  have  been  connected  in  olden 
times  with  India  by  a  rocky  causeway,  a  portion  of  which  is 
still  visible  on  the  Indian  side  of  the  pass.  Colombo  to 
Galle,  58  miles  ;  Galle  to  Hambantotto,  61 ;  Hambantotto  to 
Batticolao,  132 ;  Batticolao  to  Trincomalee,  62 ;  Trincomalee 
to  Point  Pedro,  110;  Point  Pedro  to  Jaffna,  36;  Jaffna  to 
Paumber,  46 ;  Paumber  to  Colombo,  146  ;  making  the  whole 
distance  round  the  island  651  miles. 


570  COLOMBO. 

A  carious  incident  happened  the  other  day  at  Jaffna  to 
one  of  oar  passengers,  which  might  be  told  to  Danrin.  Mr 
T.  was  in  the  jangle  with  his  dogs  when  a  monkey  was 
started,  and  being  hard  pressed  by  the  dogs,  it  ran  to  Mr  T. 
and  climbed  np  his  legs  for  protection.  Thermometer  in  my 
cabin  at  5  p.m.,  88^ 

lUA,  Colombo. — We  anchored  here  on  Sunday  morning  at 
eight  o'clock,  after  a  smooth-water  trip  from  Jaffna  of  about 
twenty-six  hours.  Yesterday  I  was  employed  in  packing  the 
shells  I  bought  at  Trincomalee,  so  as  at  any  rate  to  give  a 
chance  to  some  of  them  of  getting  home  unbroken.  If  one 
were  to  keep  steadily  in  view  the  trouble  these  sort  of 
purchases  entail  in  the  packing,  in  getting  the  proper  sort 
of  box  made  in  which  to  ship  them,  and  afterwards  in  finding 
a  vessel  to  carry  them  home,  and  seeing  to  their  shipment, 
many  an  article  would  be  left  un bought ;  for  help  in  such 
cases  is  not  readily  found  in  these  countries  by  travellers, 
and  a  day's  work  in  a  bedroom  with  the  thermometer  at  90"* 
is  not  pleasant,  even  if  there  should  be  no  after  delays  or 
obstructions  experienced  before  the  task  you  have  set  yourself 
be  completed.  Once  Qver,  however,  and  your  purchases 
fairly  gone  out  of  sight,  it  is  not  a  little  satisfactory  to 
survey  your  personal  baggage  again  reduced  to  its  normal 
dimensions.  My  box,  barring  the  address  to  be  put  on,  is 
now  ready  to  be  sent  off,  but  I  have  yet  to  find  a  vessel  that 
will  take  it,  and  a  broker  who  will  tt^e  charge  of  it. 

There  is  a  little  ferment  in  this  place  at  present,  caused  by 
the  apparent  near  approach  to  a  commencement  being  made 
in  constructing  a  breakwater  a  mile  or  more  in  length,  and 
which  is  estimated  to  cost  about  half  a  million  of  money,  and 
very  probably  may  cost  double  that  sum,  and  afterwards  may 
be  inadequate  to  the  reception  of  many  large  steamers.  It 
seems  to  have  been  short-sighted  policy  the  making  the 
railway  from  Colombo  to  Kandy,  instead  of  from  Kandy  to 
Trincomalee.  The  distance  would  seem  to  be  about  the 
same;  but  individual  and  vested  interests  carried  the  day, 
and  the  future  of  the  island  was  sacrificed.  In  the  immediate 
neighbourhood  of  Trincomalee  there  are  most  extensive  plains 
of  rich  soil  calling  aloud  for  capital  and  enterprise  to  make 
them  productive.  For  cotton  and  rice,  I  am  told,  no  land  could 


COLOMBO,  571 

be  better  adapted,  and  perhaps  for  Bugar  alBO,  thongh  they 
saj  that  sugar  has  been  tried,  and  found  not  to  answer.  The 
fact  is,  Trinoomalee  has  no  commerce,  and  consequently  no 
friends  to  advocate  its  worth  or  importance*  All  commerce 
with  the  outside  world  is  carried  on  from  Colombo  and  Galle. 
The  dwellings,  the  godowns,  the  mills,  the  establishments 
for  drying  coffee,  all  are  located  at  ihese  two  ports,  but 
principally  at  Colombo.  When  the  island  was  conquered,  we 
found  the  Dutch  located  at  Colombo,  so  we  turned  them  out, 
and  have  continued  there  ever  since,  and  every  day  increasing 
our  interest  in  the  place ;  and  now,  with  a  railway  to  Kandy, 
and  being  extended  in  among  the  coffee  estates,  he  must 
be  a  bold  Governor  who  would  tiirn  his  thoughts  to  the 
removal  of  the  port  from  Colombo  to  Trincomalee ;  and 
so  it  is  that  a  first  mistake  is  afterwards  found  to  be 
irremediable.  I  am  told  that  the  great  bulk  of  the  Tamil 
Christians  scattered  throughout  Ceylon,  and  they  are  nume- 
rous, belong  to  the  Catholic  Church,  comparatively  only  a 
few  having  joined  any  other  of  the  Christian  sects ;  and  this 
is  intelligible.  The  Roman  Catholic  priest  has  neither  wife 
nor  children  to  occupy  his  thoughts  or  to  demand  his  first 
care ;  this  alone  gives  him,  in  dealing  with  the  natives,  a 
great  advantage  over  the  sectarian  minister,  who  is  generally 
bnrthened  in  these  countries  with  the  cares  of  a  family. 
Then,  again,  the  Catholic  priests  are  a  more  educated  class  of 
men,  they  say,  than  our  missionaries ;  the  religion  they  teach 
is  more  attractive  to  the  Tamil ;  their  gilded  gods,  their 
showy  robes  and  vestments,  their  genuflexions  and  prostra- 
tions, all  possess  attractions  for  the  Tamil ;  even  the  very 
fact  of  the  mass  being  in  a  language  which  no  Tamil  can 
understand  is  imposing;  and  more  than  all,  perhaps,  the 
fact  of  being  able  by  confession  to  lay  the  burden  of  his 
sins  on  the  priest,  and  to  get  absolution,  must  have  an 
inexpressible  charm  for  him.  So  far  as  the  mysteries  of  the 
different  sects  go,  why,  they  are  pretty  much  on  a  par,  all 
of  them,  and  must  be  equally  unintelligible  to  the  Tamil 
mind ;  so  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  our  Protestant 
sects  in  the  matter  of  conversions  should  be  completely  out- 
stripped by  the  zealous  Catholic  priest 

\Mhy  Galle. — I  came  here  yesterday  morning  by  coach, 


572 


GALLE. 


seveuty-two  miles  in  eleven  hoars.  We  had  a  full  moon, 
and  were  not  fxoubled  by  heat,  so  in  a  manner  the  jonmej 
was  made  in  comparative  comfort ;  the  carriages,  however, 
have  hard  seats  to  sit  npon,  and  hard  backs  and  sides  to 
lean  against,  so  one  is  oblig^ed  to  sit  bolt  upright  like  an 
earwig  when  the  seats  are  idl  occupied,  as  they  were  when  I 
came  down,  and  in  this  position  at  night  one  is  apt  to  be 
nodding,  and  is  thus  exposed  to  tumble  out  into  the  road. 
It  IS  very  unpleasant  to  be  overcome  with  sleep  and  not  to 
be  able  to  find  a  momentary  resting-place  for  your  heal 
My  steamer  came  in  yesterday  from  Bombay,  and  now  only 
awaits  the  arrival  of  the  boat  with  the  EngUsh  mail  before 
starting  for  Australia. 

15^A. — Qalle  is  a  walled  town,  but  in  these  days  walls 
are  often  obstructions,  and  thus  worse  than  useless.  At 
present  a  new  outlet  from  the  town  is  being  made  into  the 
country,  and  in  this  operation  a  considerable  gap  in  the  old 
Dutch  wall  is  being  made.  The  thickness  of  the  wall  is 
hard  upon  twenty  feet,  and,  doubtless,  it  would  take  a  deal 
of  pounding  before  a  breach  could  be  made  in  it  It  is 
built  of  large  stones,  apparently  thrown  in  higgledy-piggledy, 
with  earth  to  form  the  core  of  the  wall,  and  then  the  wall  is 
faced  with  irregularly-shaped  rough  stones.  Two  elephants 
are  employed  in  removing  these  stones  after  they  are  dug 
out,  and  I  have  stood  for  hours  watching  these  aDimals  at 
work.  A  Tamil  is  mounted  on  the  elephant's  back,  and 
guides  and  instructs  him  what  to  do,  principally  by  talking 
to  him,  but  he  carries  m  one  hand  a  short  boathook,  with 
which  he  either  prods  or  hooks  the  elephant  when 
necessary  to  stimulate  him  to  extra  exertion.  When 
brought  up  to  a  stone  which  he  is  expected  to  remove  to 
a  distance  of  some  forty  or  fifty  feet,  he  first  tries  to  move 
it  witJi  his  trunk ;  if  unsuccessful,  he  then  applies  a  foot  Bs 
well,  and  if  the  stone  be  too  heavy  for  this  combination  of 
power,  he  deliberately  kneels  down,  and  placing  his  fore- 
head agaihst  it,  uses  all  his  strength  to  push  it  before  him. 
A  stone  that  he  can  manage  to  roll  along  he  first  lifts  with 
his  trunk,  and  then  steadies  and  pushes  it  over  with  one  foot 
Before  acknowledging  that  the  stone  is  too  heavy  for  him  to 
move,  he  applies  his  power  in  all  sorts  of  ways ;  he  tries  to 


GALLE  TO  MELBOURNE.  573 

lift  it,  if  it  be  ever  so  little,  by  placing  his  trunk  under 
every  accessible  part  of  it  in  succession,  and  if  all  will  not 
io,  he  seems  to  give  up  trying  very  unwillingly.  A  pair  of 
;hain-traces  are  then  attached  to  the  stubborn  stone,  and 
^ith  a  loud  roar  the  elephant  applies  all  his  strength  to 
iraw  it,  and,  sooner  or  later,  always  succeeds.  What 
strikes  one  is,  that  the  animal  really  appears  to  possess 
more  intellect  than  the  Tamils  that  are  working  with  him. 
Bven  the  Cingalese  take  an  interest  in  watching  these 
two  elephants  at  work,  and  from  one  to  two  hundred  of 
bhem  spend  the  whole  day  in  looking  on.  They  are  both 
pung  elephants,  male  and  female ;  the  former  only  has 
smy  appearance  of  tusks,  and  these  are  only  some  three 
inches  long. 

25^^. — I  have  been  nine  days  now  on  board  this  steamer 
on  the  way  to  Melbourne.  The  water  has  been  like  a  mill- 
pond  ever  since  we  left  Galle,  barring  a  long  very  gentle 
swell  from  the  south.  Thermometer  88°,  and  until  yester- 
day we  have  had  no  wind  sufficient  to  blow  out  a  candle. 
We  have  several  invalid  passengers  on  board,  victims  to  the 
climate  of  India;  one  of  them,  the  doctors  say,  will  never 
reach  Australia. 

21th. — A  Major  C.  came  on  board,  J  believe,  at  Bom- 
bay. He  was  then,  I  am  told,  very  ill,  and  had  been  warned 
that  he  would  never  reach  Australia;  he  was  suffering 
from  dropsy.  He  had  a  wife  and  child  with  him.  His 
cabin  was  next  to  mine,  and  his  moaning  and  groaning 
for  many  days  told  me  of  constant  suffering  On  Sunday, 
just  as  the  bell  rung  for  dinner,  he  quietly  breathed  his  last. 
At  some  time  during  the  night  the  body  was  removed  to  the 
post-office  on  the  upper  deck,  amidst  the  subdued  cries  and 
shrieks  of  his  wid(5w,  and  was  there  sewed  up  in  a  hammock, 
and  weighted  with  the  requisite  amount  of  old  iron  fire-bars. 
The  tolling  of  the  bell  at  8  a.m.  yesterday  announced  the 
approaching  funeral.  The  body,  covered  with  the  English 
ensign,  was  brought  to  the  midship  gangway  upon  a 
grating,  and  placed  in  a  slanting  position  to  the  deep  blue 
sea.  Mr ,  a  passenger  clergyman,  read  the  burial  ser- 
vice, and  at  its  termination,  the  ensign  being  withdrawn,' 
the  body  was  shot  into  its  roomy  watery  grave  ;  no  narrow  * 


574.  GALLE  TO  MELBOURNE, 

tenement,  such  as  those  who  die  on  shore  have  to  pat  up 
with,  encloses  M.  C. ;  he  disports  at  his  pleasure  over  the 
whole  wide  Pacific  Ooean^  anything  but  pacific,  however, 
when  this  victim  was  cast  into  it,  and  instantly  dis- 
appeared between  its  yawning  billows. 

28^ — Chairs  on  the  quarter-deck  of  a  crowded  passenger- 
ship  are  often  a  nuisance,  not  only  to  those  passengers  who 
do  not  possess  chairs,  but  even  to  those  who  do.     If  nume- 
rous, they  are  always  in  the  way ;  they  cumber  the  deck  and 
prevent  locomotion.    No  ship  has  more  room  on  the  quar- 
ter-deck than  is  required  for  taking  exercise.     Those  who 
possess  chairs  are  constantly  being  put  out  by  finding  their 
chairs  occupied  by  passengers  who  have  none  of  their  own, 
or  by  the  officers  of  the  ship,  and  it  is  not  every  one  who 
likes  to  assert  his  right  to  a  chair  and  to  displace  an  intruder, 
however  much  he  might  require  it  for  himself.    I  never  carry 
a  chair,  first  because  it  favours  laziness,  and  next  because  I 
dislike  having  to  dispossess  intruders ;  the  operation  begets 
bad  blood,  however  delicately  and  dexterously  it  may  be  per- 
formed.    There  can  be  no  doubt  that  our  passenger-ships 
might  have  the  seats  on  the  quarter-deck  so  arranged  as  to 
be   able   to  do  away  in   great  part  with  the  necessity  of 
passengers  carrying.seats  of  their  own.     French  passenger- 
ships  are  much  ahead  of  the  English  in  this  respect,  and 
American  still  more  so.     Officers  on  board  passenger-ships 
— how  seldom  do  old  travellers  find  among  them  a  man  who 
comes  up  to  his  hecai  ideal  of  what  an  officer  ought  to  be ! 
and  I  attribute  this  to  the  fact  that  many  of  them  pass 
all  their  time  when  off  duty,  and  at  times  a  portion  of  it 
when  on  duty,  in  talking  nonsense,  flirting,  in  fact,  with  the 
lady  passengers,  finding  such  occupation  much  more  pleasing 
thim  the  study  of  their  profession ;  and  the  mischief  is  not 
limited  to  the  time  wasted  in  this  way,  but  it  extends  much 
further,  by  occupying  their  thoughts  even  when  necessity 
obliges  them  to  be  attending  to  the  ship's  duty.    Any  one  who 
chooses  may  soon  convince  himself  of  this  by  asking  a  few 
questions.     He  will  find  that  not  one  officer  in  ten  can  tell 
him  the  position  of  the  ship  at  noon,  neither  latitude  nor 
longitude,  nor  the  distance  run,  nor  the  distance  from  the 
port  of  destination.    The  man  whose  duty  it  is  to  detennioe 


GALLE  TO  MELBOURNE.  575 

these  points,  and  post  them  up  for  general  information,  may 
remember  a  few  hours  after  he  has  accomplished  his  duty 
something  about  them,  but  it  is  not  always  that  he  does.  At 
smy  rate,  no  one  else  but  the  captain  ever  troubles  his  head 
3n  the  subject.  Try  to  find  out  by  inquiry  among  the 
3fficers  the  tonnage  of  the  ship,  her  real  capacity  for  carry- 
ing cargo,  her  exact  amount  of  accommodation  for  carry- 
ing passengers,  her  length,  her  breadth,  or  the  depth  of 
bold,  the  power  of  her  engines,  or  the  daily  amount  of  coal 
X)nsumed,  and  you  will  soon  find  that  not  one  in  ten 
3f  them  can  answer  your  questions.  Their  thoughts  are 
elsewhere,  not  in  their  profession.  These  are  dry  subjects 
Tor  young  men;  flirting,  talking  nonsense  with  ladies  on 
the  quarter-deck  or  in  the  cabin,  is  much  more  to  their 
taste,  and  where  unrestrained,  naturally  has  the  preference. 
It  is  only  when  a  man  has  arrived  at  the  command  of  a 
ship  that  professional  subjects,  matters  connected  with  his 
duty,  have  much  attention.  As  for  the  doctors,  at  sea. 
many  of  them  spend  almost  all  their  time  with  the  ladies, 
and  at  table  often  occupy  a  choice  of  places.  All  this 
is  not  as  it  should  be ;  but  how  is  it  to  be  remedied  ? 
The  trade  wind  is  not  quite  so  strong  to-day  nor  the  sea  so 
high.  Our  speed  yesterday  was  at  one  time  reduced  to 
five  and  a  half  knots,  and  our  run  for  the  twenty-four 
hours  was  only  173  miles.  The  glass,  however,  has  risen 
two-tenths ;  not  much  difference  in  the  temperature,  80**  in 
tny  cabin. 

31«^. — We  have  had  two  days*  tolerable  run,  176  and  217 
miles.  Now,  however,  the  wind  blows  fresh  again,  and  right 
in  our  teeth,  and  though  we  are  but  200  miles  from  King 
George's  Sound,  it  seems  doubtful  whether  we  can  get  there 
before  to-morrow  evening,  if  then.  It  is  now  noon,  and  I 
have  not  yet  seen  Cape  Lewin.  Aneroid  very  high  ;  it  rises 
in  these  latitudes  with  a  southerly  wind,  and  falls  with  a 
northerly.  Temperature  very  pleasant,  72**  in  my  cabin  to- 
day. Ship  getting  very  light,  and  we  are  not  making  over 
six  knots. 

April  3fl?. — On  the  1st,  at  3  p.m.,  we  anchored  in  King 
George's  Sound,  fifteen  days  from  Galle.  Of  course  most  of 
us  started  off  for  shore  even  before  the  steamer  was  at  anchor ; 


576  ALBANY. 

in  fact,  we  did  not  anchor  immediately  on  oar  arrivaly  for  we 
first  hauled  alongside  the  coaling  hulk,  an  operation  that  occu- 
pied more  than  an  honr.  Albany,  the  skeleton  town  of  King 
George's  Sound,  has  grown  somewhat  since  I  was  here  three 
years  ago,  but  not  much.  The  land  in  every  direction  within 
thirty  miles  of  it  is  veiy  poor,  and  consequently  does  not 
offer  inducements  for  squatters,  so  that  there  is  but  little  of 
what  they  call  the  back  country  settled  The  location  of  the 
town  is  pretty,  and  though  the  site  appears  to  be  sand  and 
nothing  but  sand,  trees  and  shrubs  grow  upon  it  luxuriantly. 
A  few  Norfolk  Island  pines,  some  twenty  to  twenty-fiye  feet 
high,  look  very  healUiy,  and  eyen  already  are  handsome 
trees.  The  gardens  are  besprinkled  with  geraniums  aod 
other  flowers.  The  main  streets,  running  east  and  west, 
divide  the  town  into  five  deep  strips,  meant  some  day  or  other 
to  be  cut  into  blocks  by  cross  streets  running  at  right  angles 
with  the  main  streets,  but  at  present  the  houses  are  anything 
but  continuous  ;  in  fact,  Albany  at  present  is  but  the  nucleus 
of  a  town.  We  have  brought  only  two  passengers  for  the 
Sound.  I  made  two  excursions  on  shore,  one  the  day  we 
arrived,  and  again  yesterday  morning.  The  first  day  I  went 
to  the  top  of  a  hill  near  the  town,  perhaps  350  feet  above  the 
sea,  and  had  from  the  summit  a  clear  panoramic  view  of  the 
surrounding  country ;  the  neighbourhood  is  dotted  with  many 
lakes,  and  the  land  seemed  everywhere  covered  with  scrub, 
with  granite  boulders  cropping  up  pretty  thickly  in  places.  The 
harbour  is  a  fine  sheet  of  water  with  a  narrow  entrance,  and 
well  sheltered  from  every  wind.  On  coming  down  the  hill  I 
walked  through  the  town^  and  ran  against  a  fellow  offering 
for  sale  two  young  cockatoos,  which  he  said  he  had 
taken  from  their  nest  in  a  gum-tree  a  hundred  miles  or 
more  in  the  interior.  The  wild  black  cockatoo  is  common 
enough  in  Australia  and  Tasmania,  but  I  had  never  before 
seen  a  young  one,  nor  had  I  ever  before  heard  of  the  nest 
being  discovered.  On  my  second  run  ashore,  I  went  to  the 
summit  of  another  granite  hill  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
town,  and  about  300  feet  above  it.  The  views  from  it  were 
more  or  less  what  I  had  enjoyed  the  day  before.  The  sides 
of  both  hills  are  covered  with  scrub,  growing  among  granite 
boulders.     Whilst  seated  upon  the  bare  granite  crown  of  this 


KING  GEORGE'S  SOUND.  577 

hilly  two  natives  came  up  to  us ;  both  of  them  spoke  English 
fluently,  in  fact,  remarkably  welL  One  of  them  had  been 
servant,  he  said,  with  Sir  Qeorge  Grey,  and  had  gone  with 
him  to  New  Zealand.  They  were  intelligent  fellows,  and 
they  pointed  out  to  us,  growing  very  plentifully,  the  poisonous 
shrub  so  fatal  to  sheep  that  eat  of  it,  which  does  not  ex- 
tend, they  said,  beyond  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the 
settlement  These  natives  usually  visit  Albany  on  the  arrival 
of  steamers,  and  the  rest  of  their  time  they  pass  in  the  bush. 
Their  only  covering  was  a  very  ragged  kangaroo-skin  cloak. 
Their  black  curly  hair  was  dyed  red  with  some  earthy  pig- 
ment, and  well  oiled  or  greased  with  kangaroo  fat.  They 
were  very  dirty,  which  gave  them  a  degraded  appearance. 
Well  cleaned  and  decently  dressed,  it  struck  me  that  both 
of  them  might  be  made  to  cut  a  respectable  appearance. 
They  were  of  medium  height,  and  not  badly  built,  with  good 
heads,  and  expressive  and  not  badly-formed  features,  very 
dark-brown  complexions,  and  their  teeth  white  and  regular. 
We  saw  a  score  or  more  of  them  moving  about  Albany.  The 
women  I  saw  were  disgustingly  dirty. 

We  filled  up  our  coal-bunkers  during  the  night,  and  at  1 
P.M.  we  were  en  route  for  Melbourne  (1340  miles),  and  are 
now,  at  11  A.M.,  going  along  ten  and  a  half  knots,  with  fine 
weather,  and  a  fresh  breeze  from  N.N.E.  off  the  land.  At 
11  P.M.  we  passed  the  Bangalore  homeward  bound,  and  the 
boat  bound  to  Adelaide  that  had  left  the  Sound  two  hours 
before  us.  Mr  Leigh's  yacht,  the  Linda^  left  King  George's 
Sound  the  same  day  with  us. 

6M. — We  are  to-day  at  noon  203  miles  from  Cape  Otway,. 
having  made  a  good  run  yesterday.  Since  the  3d  we  have 
had  a  continuation  of  fine  weather  and  a  calm  sea,  with  the 
wind  at  times  so  far  aft  as  to  enable  us  to  set  all  sail.  We 
have  logged  occasionally  twelve  and  a  half  knots.  To  all 
appearance,  we  ought  to  arrive  at  Port  Phillip  (Melbourne) 
some  time  to-morrow  evening.  Our  saloon  passengers  are 
an  admixture  of  English,  Scotch,  and  Irish,  French,  (Ger- 
mans, and  Americans,  Jews  and  Christians,  squatters, 
merchants,  and  military  officers,  ministers  of  the  church,  and 
globe  trotters;  among  them  several  invalids,  victims  to  the 
climate  of  India,  or  possibly  to  the  brandy-and-soda  imbibed 

2o 


578  NORTIt'WEST  COAST  OF  TASMANIA. 

to  such  excess  in  that  conntrj.  I  have  already  recorded  the 
death  of  one  of  these  Indian  invalids.  Unfortunately  my 
cabin  adjoined  his,  and  for  two  or  three  days  after  his  body 
had  been  consigned  to  its  roomy  grave,  my  rest  and  peace 
were  occasionally  broken  by  the  sobs  of  his  disconsolate 
widow.  Now,  however,  that  a  fortnight  has  passed  away, 
the  widow's  grief  is  softened,  and  has  given  place,  I  hope,  to 
quiet  resignation.     This  is  as  it  should  be. 

17M,  on  board  the  *  Tamar.^ — ^At  4  p.m.  we  anchored  in 
Hobson's  Bay,  twenty  days  from  GkiUe,  and  five  days  from 
King  George's  Sound.  T.  M.  came  on  board  as  soon  as  we 
had  anchored,  passed  my  luggage,  and  I  started  at  once  for 
the  shore*  Took  a  car  and  drove  to  Melbourne  (2|  miles), 
and  found  an  empty  room  at  the  Port  Phillip  Club  Hotel, 
where  I  remained  until  yesterday  at  noon,  when  I  embarked 
on  board  this  craft  for  Launceston.  We  are  now,  at  10.30 
A.M.,  within  about  ten  miles  of  the  ^^Heads,"  and  then  we  shall 
have  forty  miles  of  river  to  do  before  reaching  Launceston. 
The  usual  passage  from  Melbourne  to  Launceston  is  aboat 
twenty-four  hours. 

2Qth. — Left  the  Tamar  at  Greorge  Town  at  1  p.m.  on  18th, 
and  embarked  on  board  the  Pioneer  for  Circular  Head  an 
hour  afterwards,  that  little  steamer  having  called  at  (George 
Town  on  her  way  out  of  the  river  from  Launceston.  It  took 
us  about  four  hours  to  reach  the  Mersey  (Torquay),  where 
we  remained  the  night ;  the  tide  not  answering  earlier  for 
us  to  cross  the  bar  at  the  Forth  (our  next  port),  we  did  not 
get  away  until  noon  next  day  (19th).  From  the  Forth  we 
entered  the  Leven,  and  then  on  to  Emu  Bay,  where  we  were 
detained  three  hours  landing  cargo  in  the  dark.  From  Ema 
Bay,  which  we  left  about  11  p.m.,  we  went  on  to  Table  Cape, 
where  we  landed  a  couple  of  passengers,  and  then  proceeded 
on  to  Circular  Head,  and  went  alongside  the  wharf  about  two 
o'clock  in  the  morning. 

A  good  .part  of  the  next  four  days  we  spent  in  riding  over 
the  splendid  property  of  the  Van  Diemen's  Land  Company. 
In  the  neighbourhood  of  Circular  Head  it  consists  of  20,000 
acres,  a  portion  of  which  is  cleared  and  occupied  as  farms. 
The  want  of  population,  and  the  consequent  low  state  of  the 
agricultural  interest  in  Tasmania  generally,  has  prevented 


CIRCULAR  HEAD.  579 

the  Company  from  deriving  much  income  from  this  part  of 
their  property ;  but  the  time  is  approaching  when  land  will 
be  in  demand,  and  the  noble  timber  that  covers  the  uncleared 
part  of  the  property  will  be  eagerly  sought  after  for  exporta- 
tion to  Victwia,  where  the  country  is  being  rapidly  denuded 
of  timber.*  On  the  24th,  at  2  p.m.,  we  started  from  Circular 
Head  on  horseback,  on  our  journey  by  the  coast,  principally 
to  Launceston,  and  at  6  p.m.  we  were  in  comfortable  quarters 
under  Mr  D.'s  roof,  a  farmer  who  formerly  kept  an  inn  here, 
at  Bocky  Cape,  but  had  given  up  doing  so,  the  traffic  on  the 
road  not  being  sufficient  to  warrant  his  continuing  to  pay  a 

*  A  good  prospect  seems  at  last  to  be  opening  up  for  the  holders  of  Van  Die- 
men's  Liand  shares.  For  several  years  past,  with  some  occasional  intervals,  the 
shares  have  been  unsaleable,  or  only  saleable  at  a  fractional  part  of  their  cost. 
Bat  how  could  it  be  otherwise  ?  Farming,  the  only  source  from  which  the  Com- 
pany drew  any  revenue,  was  at  the  lowest  possible  ebb,  simply  because  there  were 
but  few  mouths  to  be  fed  in  the  island,  and  the  only  outside  markets  open  to  the 
Tasmanian  cultivator  (Victoria  and  New  South  Wales)  were  virtually  shut  against 
him  by  heavy  protective,  and  in  some  cases  by  prohibitory  duties ;  so  that,  in  fact, 
the  farmer  could  find  no  remunerative  market  for  hardly  any  produce  he  might 
grow  beyond  what  he  could  consume  himself.  This  remark  applies  principally  to 
the  cultivation  of  the  Company's  farms  at  Emu  Bay  and  Circular  Head,  whers 
potatoes  form  the  main  product 

Tasmania  is  nearly  as  large  as  Ireland,  and  the  whole  population  amounts  to 
about  one  hundred  thousand  souls  ;  hence  it  is  clear,  since  there  was  no  outside 
remunerative  market  for  its  agricultural  produce,  and  but  few  consumers  at  home, 
farming  could  not  flourish. 

Of  what  availed  it^  then,  that  the  people  in  Europe  were  told  that  the  climate 
was  the  finest  in  the  world  ;  that  the  soil  was  equal  to  the  best  met  with  any- 
where ;  that  in  ita  forests  was  found  the  most  useful  timber  for  aU  economical 
purposes  in  great  abundance  ;  that  its  principal  ports  were  only  occasionally 
equalled  elsewhere  ?  All  this  could  be  shown  to  be  perfectly  true,  but  it  availed 
nothing  in  attracting  settlers,  for  it  was  known  that  the  island  possessed  but  one 
industry,  the  cultivation  of  the  soil,  for  the  produce  of  which  there  was  no  re* 
munerative  market.  The  bait  that  had  attracted  thousands  of  people  to  Victoria 
had  not  been  discovered  in  Tasmania.  There  had  been  no  gold  rush  there  :  had 
there  been,  doubtless  the  same  results  would  have  followed  as  in  Victoria. 

A  change  has  now  happily  come  over  the  country.  Iron  mines  are  about  to  be 
opened  up  under  the  happiest  auspices ;  gold,  though  there  cannot  be  said  to 
have  been  a  gold  rush,  has  been  found  in  many  places,  and  the  mines  are  being 
worked  with  Increasing  success.  On  the  river  Hellier,  which  takes  its  rise  in  the 
Company's  property,  gold  has  been  found ;  and  on  the  confines  of  their  pro- 
perty at  Mount  BiscbofT,  tin  mines  are  now  being  worked,  which  promise  a  fabu- 
lous return.  These  mines  are  about  forty-five  miles  in  the  interior  from  Emu 
Bay,  and  the  only  road  to  them  from  the  coast  is  from  that  port  running 
through  the  Company's  lands  for  forty  miles,  made  by  the  Company  many  years 
ago,  through  a  dense  forest  of  noble  timber  for  a  portion  of  the  route. 

A  tramway  on  this  road  is  about  to  be  constructed  by  the  Company  to  bring 
down  the  produce  of  the  tin  mines,  and  will  also  open  up  a  continuous  block  of 
land  belonging  to  the  Company,  reaching  from  the  interior  down  to  and  encir- 
cling Emu  Bay,  and  consisting  of  about  210,000  acres,  a  great  part  of  which  is 
the  finest  land  in  Tasmania. 

Emu  Bay  is  the  only  good  roadstead  with  water  for  large  vessels  on  the  whole 
range  of  coast,  between  Launceston  and  Circular  Head,  and  is  within  twelve  to 
fourteen  houra*  steaming  of  Melbourne. 


58o  EMU  BAY  TO  LA  UNCESTON. 

twelve-guinea  license.  At  eight  next  morning  we  were  in 
the  saddle  again,  and  at  1  p.m.  we  reached  Bockj  Cape. 
After  dinner  we  walked  up  to  Mr  Moore's  sawmill.  The 
mill  is  driven  by  water-power,  and  consists  of  one  saw  for 
catting  np  logs  and  two  circular  saws  for  cutting  the  three-inch 
plank  into  such  smaller  shapes  as  may  be  required.  There  is 
steam-power  also,  which  seems  to  be  made  use  of  during  two 
or  three  months  in  summer,  when  water  is  short.  Mr  M., 
who  is  a  member  of  the  Tasmanian  Parliament,  was  very 
courteous,  and  explained  matters  connected  with  the  mill 
He  is  an  intelligent  and  clear-headed  man,  and  upon  his 
energy  and  capital  the  whole  trade  of  the  district  is  depen- 
dent A  schooner  laden  with  sawn  timber  for  Sydney  was 
being  despatched  by  him  whilst  we  were  at  Table  Cape. 

We  slept  at  Table  Cape,  and  at  7.15  next  morning  started 
for  Emu  Bay,  where  we  arrived  at  a  little  before  ten.  Cir- 
cular Head  to  Bocky  Cape,  twenty  miles;  thence  to  Table 
Cape,  twenty-two  miles;  Table  Cape  to  Emu  Bay,  twelve 
miles. 

30M,  Launeeston. — Left  Emu  Bay  at  9  a.m.  on  the  28th, 
the  weather  continuing  so  wet  that  we  were  obliged  to  abandon 
our  intention  of  paying  a  visit  to  the  tin  mines  at  Mount 
Bischofil  At  the  '^  Penguin  ''  dismounted,  and  took  a  peep 
into  a  mine,  which,  on  its  first  discovery,  had  promised  great 
things.  It  was  full  of  water,  and  a  look  at  the  steam-engine 
satisfied  us  that,  for  want  of  a  coat  of  white-lead  and  a 
little  oil,  it  would  soon  be  of  little  value.  At  noon,  or  a 
little  after,  we  reached  the  ^^  Leven/'  and  then  on  in  succes- 
sion to  the  Forth,  the  Don,  the  Mersey,  and  Latrobe,  arriving 
at  Latrobe  at  4.30  p.m.,  or  seven  and  a  half  hours  after  leav- 
ing Emu  Bay,  thirty-eight  miles.  Mr  A.,  our  landlord^  gave 
us  a  glowing  account  of  the  grain  harvest  in  the  district, 
which  had  just  been  got  in ;  a  good  yield  and  a  good  sample, 
and  very  fair  prices — wheat  4s.,  barley  6s.,  and  oats  2s.  6d.  a 
bushel.  The  tramway,  sixteen  miles  long,  and  which  reaches 
from  Latrobe  to  within  twelve  miles  of  Deloraine,  was  being 
made  use  of  to  bring  the  grain  into  Latrobe  for  shipment  in 
small  schooners  on  the  Mersey  river  to  Melbourne.  The 
Uttia  atiaiwir  Annie,  drawing  four  to  six  feet  water,  comes 
4VHto^|^flyb||Hlil^  Imt  the  larger  craft,  drawing  seven  to 


EMU  BA  y  TO  LAVNCESTON.  581 

nine  feet,  do  not  come  beyond  Torquay,  seven  miles  below 
Latrobe.  The  land  in  this  district  would  seem  to  be  very 
goody  as  it  is  also  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Forth.  La- 
trobe  has  grown  into  something  like  a  town,  with  one  wide 
and  long  straight  street  running  through  it  from  end  to  end. 
There  are,  however,  those  who  think  it  will  lose  its  import- 
ance when  the  railway  becomes  continuous  from  Torquay,  at 
the  mouth  of  the  Mersey,  to  Deloraine,  for  they  argue  that  then 
the  agricultural  produce  of  the  district  will  find  its  way  at 
once  either  to  Torquay  for  shipment  or  to  Launceston  for 
consumption,  without  stopping  in  transit  at  Latrobe.  Yes- 
terday (29th)  we  were  in  the  saddle  a  little  before  nine 
o'clock,  and  after  missing  our  way,  which  caused  a  loss  of 
half  an  hour,  and  afterwards  stopping  at  the  Junction  Inn 
for  an  hour  to  bait  the  horses,  we  arrived  at  Deloraine  at 
2.10  P.M.,  having  been  somewhat  over  five  hours,  including 
stoppages,  in  doing  the  twenty-eight  miles  that  separated 
Deloraine  from  Latrobe.  Here  we  dined  at  a  hotel  in  which 
an  inquest  was  being  held  on  the  body  of  a  man,  a  shoe- 
maker, who,  tired  of  life,  had  bung  himself  in  the  morning ; 
and  at  4.20  took  the  train  and  arrived  at  Launceston  (forty- 
five  miles)  at  about  half-past  six  o'clock,  putting  up  at  the 
Brisbane  (Symond's),  my  old  hoteL 

May  5tAy  Hobart  Tonm. — On  Thursday  evening,  1st  May, 
we  started  from  Launceston  in  the  coach  for  Hobart  Town, 
and  after  travelling  all  night,  we  arrived  at  8  a.h.  at  our 
destination.  The  coach  held  nine  inside,  and  every  place 
was  taken :  we  were  packed  pretty  much  like  herrings  in  a 
barrel,  having  no  room  to  stretch  our  legs,  and  were  heartily 
glad  when  the  journey  came  to  an  end,  distance  120  miles. 
On  the  3d,  to  while  away  the  time,  we  jumped  on  board  the 
steamer  Monarchy  and  went  to  New  Norfolk,  where  we  re- 
mained over  Sunday,  and  returned  to  Hobart  Town  thia 
morning.  The  distance  by  the  river  must  be  over  thirty 
miles,  though  by  land  it  is  only  twenty-two.  There  is  a 
variety  of  scenery  on  both  sides  of  the  river;  cultivation 
everywhere,  with  a  fair  sprinkling  of  cottages  and  country 
houses,  with  the  exception  of  a  short  distance  where  we 
passed  through  the  gorge  with  high  and  abrupt  hills  on  either 
side.     On  board  the  Monarch  were  several  young  ladies,  pas- 


582  NEW  NORFOLK, 

sengers,  and  a  Captain  Fenton,  a  gentleman  fallj  eighty 
years  of  age,  who  told  us  he  had  been  forty-three  years  in 
Tasmania.  He  was  the  owner  of  a  large  estate  some  foorteen 
miles  from  New  Norfolk.  We  had  another  passenger,  too, 
who  afforded  us  some  amusement,  an  elderly  hard-headed 
Scotchwoman  9  wife  of  a  farmer  at  Bridge  water.  She  first 
attracted  our  attention  by  crying  and  sobbing,  and  on  my 
asking  her  what  was  the  matter,  she  said  the  devil  was  tempt- 
ing her  to  jump  overboard,  but  that  she  would  not  be  tempted. 
I  asked  her  in  what  shape  the  devil  appeared  to  her,  bnt 
oould  get  no  definite  reply. 

The  woman  was  tipsy,  and  the  spirits  she  had  drunk  was 
the  devil  who  was  tempting  her  to  jump  overboard.  She 
acknowledged  to  having  arrived  a  convict  in  the  colony  in 
1 840,  having  been  transported  for  fourteen  years  for  stealing 
£14.  Indeed,  she  rather  boasted  of  this,  and  of  her  having 
made  a  good  wife,  like  many  other  women,  she  said,  who  had 
come  to  the  colony  under  similar  circumstances.  Arrived  at 
New  Norfolk,  we  put  up  at  Mrs  Arnold's,  a  small  but  suffi- 
ciently comfortable  hotel.  We  spent  Sunday  in  first  driving 
to  the  salmon-ponds,  some  seven  miles  higher  up  the  river. 
They  consist  of  two  round  ponds,  thirty  feet  each  in  diameter, 
and  one  long  pond  between  the  two  round  ones.  One  of  the 
latter  was  well  stocked  with  brown  trout,  which  had  thriven 
well,  and  many  had  been  turned  into  the  little  river  Plenty, 
and  thence  found  their  way  into  the  Derwent :  many  have 
been  caught,  one  of  which  weighed  three  pounds.  The  other 
round  pond,  and  the  long  pond,  were  well  stocked  with 
salmon-trout,  many  of  them  hatched  from  ova  deposited  by 
the  first  fish  hatched  from  ova  brought  from  England  in  the 
Norfolk  in  1864  to  Melbourne,  and  from  thence  to  Hobart 
Town  in  the  Victoria  Oovernment  steamer.  The  hatching- 
house  was  now  unemployed.  The  ponds  are  supplied  with 
Water  drawn  from  the  Plenty,  in  a  good  stream  constantly  run- 
ning through  them,  and  are  situated  in  about  four  acres  of 
ground  planted  with  choice  trees  and  flowering  shrubs,  all  well 
attended  to  and  neatly  kept  These  trout  are  fed  principally 
upon  boilM)  liver,  to  which  maggots  are  sometimes  added.  They 
ate  ""w  in  to  them  very  voraciously.     In  these 

p  -ova  brought  from  England  was  hatched, 


CHARCOAL  COMPANY'S  IRON  MINE.  583 

and  in  due  time  several  thousands  young  fish  were  turned 
into  the  Derwent ;  but  up  to  the  present  day,  it  is  doubted 
by  many  persons  if  a  single  sahnon  has  ever  been  seen  in  the 
Derwent,  although  there  are  many  who. pretend  to  have  seen 
thenu  New  Norfolk  has  been  long  famed  for  its  hop-gardens, 
which  are  successfully  managed,  and  have  produced  consider- 
able wealth.  The  principal  markets  are  Sydney  and  Mel- 
bourne. The  town  of  New  Norfolk  consists  of  wide  streets^ 
laid  out  at  right  angles,  in  which  the  houses  are  few  and  far 
between.  The  principal  building  is  a  lunatic  asylum,  which 
the  boys  here  call  ^^  The  hospital  for  crankie  people."  It  is 
a  large  establishment,  and  the  dormitories,  &c.,  are  kept  very 
clean.  There  are  about  280  patients  in  it  at  present,  about 
half  of  each  sex.  At  7.30  this  morning  we  embarked  again 
on  board  the   Monarchy  and  arrived  at    Hobart   Town    at 

11.15  A.M. 

\2th. — At  6  P.M.  we  left  Hobart  Town  by  the  mail-coach, 
and  travelling  all  night,  we  reached  Launceston  at  8.30  on 
the  morning  of  the  7th.  On  the  8th  I  embarked,  with 
J.  B.  H.,  on  board  the  Pioner  for  George  Town,  where  we 
arrived  at  10  p.m.  It  rained  hard  all  the  way  down  the  river, 
and  our  cabin  was  crammed  with  passengers,  among  whom 
were  a  dozen  Chinamen,  bound  to  the  diggings  at  the  Nine 
Mile  Springs,  several  women,  and  among  them  a  young 
Irishwoman  with  a  baby  in  her  arms,  which  she  kept  feed- 
ing with  gin  and  the  breast  alternately  to  keep  it  quiet 
We  took  up  our  quarters  for  the  night  at  this  inn,  and  in  tha 
morning  we  proceeded  across  the  river  to  inspect  the  iron 
mines  and  works  belonging  to  the  Charcoal  Company.  A 
letter  which  I  brought  from  the  agent  at  Launceston  for  the 
manager  at  the  establishment,  procured  for  us  every  attention ; 
and  as  soon  as  we  landed  we  were  provided  with  a  truck, 
drawn  by  two  horses,  in  which  we  proceeded  on  tlie  tramway 
to  the  works,  a  distance  of  four  and  a  half  miles.  At  the  end 
of  the  jetty,  at  the  landing-place,  there  are  twelve  feet  water. 
The  tramway  is  defective,  inasmuch  as  there  are  many 
steepish  ascents  in  it,  which  ought  to  have  been  obviated  by 
raising  the  bridges  three  or  four  feet,  or  even  somewhat 
more.  It  took  us  three-quarters  of  an  hour  to  reach  the  fur- 
nace ;  on  returning  afterwards,  we   came   down  in  twenty 


584  CHARCOAL  COMPANY, 

minutes.  The  smeltin^fornace  has  been  erected  on  the  plan 
and  under  the  superintendence  of^  Dr  Harrison.  It  is  a 
patent  affair^  the  first  that  has  ever  been  erected ;  so  it  is 
entirely  experimental.  It  is  now  about  to  be  tested*  The 
cost  of  it,  they  tell  me,  has  been  very  large,  for  it  has  had 
frequent  alterations  made  in  it  from  the  original  plan  since 
it  was  first  built  The  draught  through  it  is  created  by  a 
revolving  fan  driven  by  a  small  steam-engine,  and  a  sfa^m 
of  ozyhydrogen  gas  is  introduced,  by  means  of  which,  it  is 
believed,  the  heat  will  be  greatly  increased  beyond  that  of  an 
ordinary  blast-furnace.  After  looking  at  the  furnace,  I  pro- 
ceeded to  the  hill  of  iron  ore,  brown  hematite,  situated  within 
a  couple  or  three  hundred  yards  of  the  furnace ;  or,  if  yon 
like,  the  furnace  is  situated  within  two  to  three  hundred  yards 
of  the  hill  of  iron  ore.  It  is  a  wonderful  mass  of  ore,  appa- 
rently inexhaustible,  for  they  have  bored  into  it  twenty-five  feet, 
and  found  it  to  reach  to  that  depth,  and  probably  very  much 
deeper.  The  ley  of  this  ore  by  analysis  is  60  per  cent,  and  it 
is  quite  free  from  sulphur.  There  is  a  red  earth  also  found  in 
great  abundance,  which  is  shown  to  contain  about  59  per  cent 
of  iron ;  and  of  magnetic  ore  in  small  bits  the  whole  surface 
of  the  hill  is  covered.  The  lode  producing  this  magnetic  ore 
is  believed  to  exist  somewhere  close  at  hand,  but  has  not  yet 
been  found.  The  ley  of  it  is  said  to  be  65  per  cent  Of 
wood,  there  are  dense  forests  in  the  neighbourhood,  a  suffi- 
cient supply  to  last  many  years ;  limestone,  too,  is  abundant, 
so  that  all  the  elements  of  success  are  near  at  hand.  The 
hill  of  ore  that  I  examined  is  called  the  Hill  of  Vulcan, 
besides  which  there  is  another  on  the  company's  land  of 
equal  importance,  a  hill  of  serpentine  mixed  with  iron  ore, 
and  containing  veins  and  strata  of  asbestos  in  quantities,  a 
mile  away  from  the  works.  A  tramway  will  take  the  ore 
from  the  hill  to  the  furnaces.  The  property  consists  of  some 
450  acres,  and  some  £7000,  I  am  told,  has  already  been 
expended  on  the  tramway  buildings  and  furnace.  We 
remained  at  these  mines  until  nearly  four  o'clock,  during 
which  time  the  Doctor  was  employed  in  heating  the  furnace 
and  superintending  alterations  being  made  in  some  of  the 
minutiaB  of  it,  preparatory  to  commencing  active  operations 
in  smelting.     We  returned  by  the  tramway  to  the  laniding- 


t 


ILFRACOMBE  COMPANY,  585 

V 

place,  and  reached  the  hotel  at  George  Town  jnst  before 
dark. 

The  following  morning  we  took  boat  again,  and  proceeded 
across  the  river  to  the  Charcoal  Company's  jetty,  landed,  and 
went  by  tramway  to  the  mines.  Here  we  left  the  Doctor  to 
look  after  his  furnace,  and  taking  a  guide,  we  proceeded  on 
foot  across  country  to  visit  Captain  Longley,  managing  the 
works  at  the  mines  of  the  Ilfracombe  Company.  The  dis- 
tance to  the  dwelling-house  is  about  three  miles,  and  two 
miles  more  took  us  to  the  works  among  the  mines,  where 
we  found  Captain  Longley.  The  road  we  had  traversed 
leads  through  forests  and  bush,  and  over  a  hill  some  1150 
feet  high,  at  the  foot  of  which  stands  the  dwelling-house 
formerly  belonging  to  Mr  Evans,  but  recently  sold  by  him, 
together  with  the  farm,  to  a  Melbourne  man,  for  £3000,  the 
whole  containing  an  area  of  1100  acres,  some  of  it  cleared, 
but  not  much.  This  at  present  is  the  residence  of  Captain 
Longley.  At  the  works,  where,  as  I  said  before,  we  met 
Captain  Longley,  we  found  the  foundation  of  the  fur- 
nace (blast)  well  advanced,  of  which  the  corner-stone  has 
since  been  laid.  The  construction  of  this  furnace  is  under 
the  (harge  of  Mr  Dods,  an  able  Scotch  engineer,  and  no 
amount  of  precaution  seems  to  be  wanting  to  ensure  a  good 
solid  working  fmrnace,  such  as  might  be  expected  to  wofk 
well  from  the  conmiencement  and  to  last  many  years. 
Bound  about  these  works  the  forest  timber  for  charcoal 
seems  inexhaustible,  and  the  land  to  some  extent  rich  for 
agricultural  purposes.  The  hill  of  iron  ore  is  within  a 
hundred  yards  or  so  of  the  furnace,  and  will  be  brought  on 
an  inclined  tramway  right  down  to  the  furnace.  The  supply 
of  ore  would  seem  to  be  inexhaustible,  situated  on  the  very 
surface.  Two  lumps  which  I  saw  entirely  above  the  surface 
must  contain  some  twelve  hundred  tons,  more  or  less.  The 
richness  of  this  ore  (brown  hematite)  is  about  60  per  cent 
There  does  not  appear  to  be  any  magnetic  ore  lying  on  the 
surface  as  at  the  Charcoal  Company's  mines,  but  there  are 
indications  of  it,  and  the  lode  may  probably  be  discovered 
later  on.  Mining  here  will  be  simply  quarrying.  After  re- 
maining a  couple  of  hours,  we  returned  to  the  dwelling- 
house,  Captain  Longley  following  somewhat  later,  having 


■ 


S86  A  LIMESTONE  CAVE. 

stopped  to  pay  his  workmen.  The  next  morning  I  started 
with  Captain  Longley  in  a  spring-cart  to  visit  a  limestone 
caye  situated  about  four  and  a  half  miles  from  the  house  and 
about  two  miles  from  the  works.  We  first  drove  to  the 
works,  and  thence  for  a  mile  along  the  road  leading  towards 
the  cave.  We  then  alighted,  and  walked  through  the  scrub 
for  about  a  mile,  when  we  came  to  a  good  hut  occupied  by 
a  Welshman  named  Thomas,  who  joined  us  as  a  guide  to 
the  cave,  the  descent  into  which,  precipitous  and  rough,  is 
some  twenty  to  thirty  feet.  The  cave  is  quite  narrow  in  the 
bottom,  just  wide  enough  to  move  along  among  the  boulders 
in  Indiiui  file,  though  above  it  widens  out  to  twenty  feet  in 
some  places.  There  is  one  passage,  however,  for  about  ten 
yards,  that  we  had  just  room  enough  to  squeeze  through,  and 
which  we  named,  after  a  similar  passage  in  the  Mammoth 
Gave  of  Kentucky,  ^^  Fat  Man's  Misery.'*  The  cave  is 
about  half  a  mile  in  length,  and  in  the  bottom  are  indicsr 
tions  of  its  having  once  been  the  bed  of  a  river.  The  only 
aperture  yet  discovered,  besides  the  entrance,  is  a  hole  in  the 
roof,  ^this  little  cave  throughout  presents  a  beautiful  display 
of  imagery.  The  sides,  roof,  and  fioor  are  almost  wholly 
covered  with  curtains,  cataracts,  stalactites,  and  stalagdiites 
of  carbonite  of  lime,  possessing  all  the  delicate  whiteness  of 
tl^e  purest  alabaster,  and  a  considerable  portion  of  its  trans- 
lucency.  There  is  tracery,  too,  of  the  most  exquisite  work- 
manship ;  figures  of  judges  on  the  bench  in  wig  atid  gown, 
and  numberless  other  figures,  both  natural  and  artificial,  are 
here  portrayed,  sometimes  truly,  sometimes  ludicrously*  The 
extent  of  this  cave  is  still  very  imperfectly  known ;  no  insect 
life  has  ever  been  seen  in  it  There  are  openings  in  the  sides 
of  the  upper  parts  of  it,  but  where  they  may  lead  to  no  one 
has  yet  discovered ;  in  fact,  the  existence  of  the  cave,  not» 
withstanding  itsj  proximity  to  Launceston,  is  known  to  very 
few  people  in  that  city ;  still  a  few  barbarians  have  found 
it  out,  and,  armed  with  hammers  and  saws  to  break  down 
the  natural  beauties,  and  boxes  in  which  to  carry  away  the 
spoil,  have  ruthlessly  destroyed  to  a  considerable  extent  these 
beautiful  freaks  of  nature,  and  left  much  of  the  debris  scat- 
tered about  the  cave.  Separation,  however,  is  rapidly  going 
on.    Many  of  the  stalactites  and  curtains  and  drapery  incnis- 


A  LIMESTONE  CAVE.  587 

lations,  which  to  the  touch  appeared  quite  dry,  had  drops  ef 
crystalline  water  hanging  on  to  their  extremities ;  and  there 
can  he  little  doubt,  if  Captain  Longley  carries  out  his  inten- 
tion of  shutting  up  the  entrance  to  the  cave,  in  half-a-^dozen 
years  the  vandalism  inflicted  will  be  greatly  repaired.  The 
height  of  the  cave  may  average  throughout  about  twenty 
feet ;  lighted  up  with  kerosine  lamps,  it  would  indeed  be  a 
gem,  this  little  cave  of  rare  beauty.  We  remained  in  it  per- 
haps an  hour  and  a  half,  and  then  slowly  wended  our  way 
back  to  Thomas's  hut,  where  we  found  the  table  laid  for 
dinner  ;  in  fact,  the  dinner  was  upon  the  table,  and  consisted 
of  a  very  good-looking^  piece  of  beef,  abundance  of  well- 
boiled  mealy  potatoes,  and  a  large  plate  piled  up  full  of 
cakes,  with  soft-tack  besides,  and  a  can  containing  at  least 
three  gallons  of  exceedingly  well-flavoured  honey.  The  cloth 
was  as  white  as  driven  snow,  and  the  knives  and  forks  and 
spoons,  as  well  as  the  plates,  were  scrupulously  clean.  There 
was  tea  too  on  the  table,  and  thick  cream,  and  nice  fresh 
butter.  Thomas's  wife,  who  was  the  genius  of  this  clean 
and  comfortable  unpretentious  hut,  was  a  Welsh  woman, 
from  Bangor,  speaking  with  the  same  dialect  as  she  had  con- 
versed in  all  her  life.  A  married  daughter  came  in  whilst 
we  were  there,  besides  whom  the  good  wife  had  three  or  four 
other  children,  all  boys.  S^e  invited  us  to  partake  of  her 
fare,  and  so  we  did  to  a  moderate  extent,  after  which  we 
again  got  under  way,  and  half  an  hour's  walk  brought  us  to 
where  we  had  left  our  horses  and  our  cart  I  say  horses,  for 
we  had  with  us  a  nice  young  boy  who  was  living  in  this 
wilderness  with  Captain  Longley,  and  who  accompanied  us  on 
horseback.  Between  the  hut  and  this  spot  we  passed  through  an 
avenue  of  trees  and  shrubs  and  palms  of  all  hues,  which,  in 
fine  weather,  must  be  a  delightful  retreat,  and  on  one  side 
of  it,  for  fifty  yards,  there  is  a  perpendicular,  smooth,  green 
wall ;  and  on  digging  into  it,  we  found  it  to  be  entirely  com- 
posed of  what  they  call  here  the  mud  palm,  a  fossil  palm, 
indicating,  they  tell  me,  the  proximity  of  coal.  We  cut  out 
and  brought  away  with  us  specimens.  At  5.30,  just  as  the 
shades  of  even  were  closing  in,  we  reached  Evans'  House, 
and  found  that  during  our  absence  several  gentlemen  had 
arrived  from  Launceston ;  beds,  howeverc  were  provided  for  us 


S88  GEORGE  TOWN. 

all.  We  were  astir  early  on  Monday  morning,  and  after 
breakfast  Mr  V.  and  myself  left  on  our  retom  to  the 
Charcoal  Gompany^s  mines,  bringing  with  as  a  pretty  heavy 
moag  of  minerals,  and  a  large  bundle  of  fern,  which,  when 
bleached,  and  afterwards  dyed,  is  worn  like  feathers  by  ladies 
in  their  bonnets.  It  took  ns  an  hour  to  reach  the  works. 
An  honr  afterwards,  Dr  £L  made  his  appearance  from  George 
Town,  and  at  onoe  gave  his  attention  to  the  furnace,  the 
child  of  hiB  own  brain,  the  heating  of  which  had  been  con- 
tinued from  the  time  of  our  last  yisit.  The  furnace  not  being 
considered  in  a  fit  state  to  receiye  the  hydrogen  gas,  and  it 
being  announced  that  it  would  be  twenty-four  hours  before 
the  result  of  this  first  trial  could  be  known,  we  determined 
to  leave  the  Doctor  at  the  works,  and  proceed  to  (George 
Town ;  for  we  wanted  washing  very  badly,  and  a  change  of 
clothes,  seeing  that  we  had  brought  nothing  with  us  but 
what  we  stood  in  when  we  left  our  hotel  three  days  before, 
and  all  the  time  we  had  been  on  the  trip  the  weather  had 
been  wet  and  boisterous,  and  the  roads,  consequently, .  eveiy- 
where  a  sea  of  mud.  In  fact,  the  bad  weather  had  lasted — 
and  it  still  continues  now — ^for  a  whole  fortnight,  such,  as 
the  oldest  inhabitant  said,  had  never  been  experienced  before 
at  this  season  of  the  year.  I  am  here  now  in  Charles's  Inn, 
in  comfortable  quarters,  awaiting  the  coming  from  Launces- 
ton  of  the  Derment  steamer,  that  I  might  get  on  board  her 
in  the  river  as  she  passes  on  her  way  to  Melbourne. 

Ibthy  on  board  the  ^DerwenV — ^It  was  5  p.m.  before  the 
Derwent  hove  in  sight  yesterday.  I  had  been  in  a  boat  an 
hour  and  a  half  waiting  before  she  made  her  appearance.  The 
weather,  which  had  been  tempestuous  for  three  weeks,  had 
broken  up,  and  had  since  been  improving,  so  we  are  moving 
aloDg  now  very  steadily ;  nevertheless  we  have  many  sea-sidL 
mothers  and  crying  children  keeping  up  a  chorus  in  the 
cabins  around.  This  craft  is  as  full  as  she  can  cram  both  of 
cargo  and  passengers ;  every  berth  is  occupied,  and  the  deck 
is  laden  with  cargo ;  and  this  too  at  a  season  when  the  traffic 
in  passengers  between  Melbourne  and  Launceston  is  usually 
trifiing.  The  trade  between  the  two  places  is  evidently 
increasing,  and  larger  boats  are  now  required.  The  two  on 
the  line,  and  which  make  one  trip  a  week  each,  the  Tamar 


SANDHURS7.  5^9 

And  the  Verwent  (the  names  of  the  two  rivers  npon  which 
Hobart  Town  and  Lannceston  are  situated)  are  about  350  tons 
burthen. 

2Qth. — We  arrived  at  Port  Phillip  at  4  p.m.  on  the  16th, 
and  in  an  hour  afterwards  I  was  again  located  in  the  Port 
Phillip  Club  Hotel  at  Melbourne.  I  find  that  the  Webb  line 
of  steamers,  heretofore  running  between  this  and  San  Fran- 
cisco, has  collapsed,  and  there  is  no  steamer  that  I  can  hear 
of  likely  to  be  going  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope ;  so  in  all 
probability  I  shall  have  to  retrace  my  steps  to  Galle  by  the 
next  Peninsular  and  Oriental  boat  In  the  meantime,  here  I 
am,  like  Mahomet's  coffin,  hanging  between  heaven  and  earth, 
with  an  attack  of  lumbago,  and  otherwise  slightly  unwelL 

26tlL — ^The  first  four  of  the  last  six  days  I  passed  at  Mel- 
bourne, the  last  two  in  a  trip  to  Sandhurst,  now  the  most 
productive  mining  district  in  Victoria*  The  town  is  now 
growing  fast,  and  is  becoming  more  cared  for.  In  all  direc- 
tions, starting  from  the  centre  of  the  town  (the  reserve  for 
public  gardens)  long  chimneys  may  be  seen,  shafts  sunk  and 
being  sunk,  some  on  reefs  and  others  in  search  of  reefs,  many 
of  which  may  perhaps  never  be  found.  The  yield  last  week 
of  the  principal  claims,  out  of  about  1200  now  offered 
to  speculators  under  the  verandah,  was  large;  prices  fluctuate 
rapidly,  and  gambling  in  them  is  constantly  producing  ruin. 
On  Saturday  night,  the  gathering  of  sharpers  and  their 
victims  under  the  verandah  was  so  dense  that  it  was  with 
difficulty  I  could  force  my  way  through  it  The  mining  at 
Sandhurst  is  now  all  quartz-reef  mining:  as  a  digging,  it 
seems  to  be  worn  out  The  distance  by  rail  from  Melbourne 
is  101^  miles ;  we  left  at  6.30  A.H.,  and  arrived  at  Melbourne 
at  10.25  A.M.,  calling  at  seventeen  stations  on  the  way. 
Three  hours  and  fifty-five  minutes. 

21th. — Went  last  evening  to  hear  the  Rev.  Mr  Clarke 
lecture  on  Dickens  at  the  Temperance  Hall.  The  lecturer 
was  introduced  by  the  chairman,  the  Honourable  Mr  Casey, 
Minister  of  Lands  and  Works.  The  lecture  lasted  over  two 
hours,  and  consisted  of  a  sketch  of  Dickens'  life  and  notice 
of  his  works,  and  an  account  of  Bob  Sawyer's  supper,  and  of 
Mrs  Gkunp's  interview  with  Betsy  Prigg.  These  two  scenes 
or  extracts  from  Dickens'  works  were  given  verbatim  and 


S90        MR  CLARKE'S  LECTURE  ON  DICKENS. 

from  memory,  and  with  cbaracteristic  hamoar  and  great 
truthfolness.  Mr  Clarke  is  a  Baptist  minister,  and  a  very 
fluent  speaker ;  he  is  brimfnl  of  fan  and  humour,  and  he 
enchained  the  attention  of  his  audience  last  night  without  a 
moment's  interruption  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  his 
two  hours*  lecture.  He  is  a  popular  preacher,  and  they  say 
he  fills  his  church  welL  I  have  never  heard  him  in  the 
pulpit,  and  I  cannot  easily  associate  in  my  mind  the  success- 
ful lecturer  of  last  night,  incomparable  in  his  delineation  of 
character  in  the  two  comic  scenes  from  Pickwick  which  I 
have  mentioned,  with  the  eloquent  pulpit-preacher  expound- 
ing the  solemn  truths  of  the  Christian  religion*  As  I  have 
already  said,  I  have  never  heard  him  preach,  but  I  cannot  but 
think  the  Sunday  congregation  would  have  great  difficulty  in 
recognising  their  pastor  in  the  lecturer  of  last  night.  Mr 
Clarke  seems  possessed  of  a  wonderfully  retentive  memoiy ; 
he  never  faltered  for  a  moment  in  his  long  characteristic 
recitations  of  last  night ;  in  fact,  he  told  us  he  thought  he 
would  have  no  difficulty  in  learning  by  heart  all  Dickeng' 
works !  He  is  doubtless  a  first-rate  actor,  and  I  can  well 
understand  how  a  company  might  have  made  him  (which  it 
is  said  they  did)  a  liberal  o£fer  to  leave  the  pulpit  and  take 
to  the  stage. 

June  IbL — Inspected  a  picture  which  had  just  arrived  from 
Europe  for  the  National  Picture  Gallery.  We  found,  on 
arriving  at  the  gallery,  that  the  process  of  removing  (rom  the 
picture  the  coating  it  had  received  before  shipment  to  preserve 
it  from  injury  by  a  long  sea-water  voyage  had  not  been  com- 
pleted, and  the  picture  consequently  had  not  been  hung  in 
the  place  awarded  to  it  on  the  wall,  and  that  the  gallery  was 
still  closed.  By  the  courtesy  of  one  of  the  officials,  we  were 
permitted  to  see  it.  It  is  a  very  large  picture,  composed  of 
many  life-size  figures,  and  represents  a  gentleman  (said  to 
be  a  portrait  of  the  Marquis  of  Lome),  who  with  his  wife  had 
fallen  into  the  hands  of  brigands  in  Italy,  in  the  act  of 
receiving  from  the  brigand  chief  a  pen  for  the  purpose  of 
signing  an  order  upon  his  banker  for  the  amount  of  the 
ransom  that  had  been  levied  upon  him.  From  this  picture 
gallery  we  visited  the  Fitzroy  Gardens.  There  are  many  fine 
young  trees  in  this  garden ;  among  them  there  must  be  at 


FITZROY  GARDENS.  59' 

least  a  thousand  thriving  Norfolk  Island  pines,  the  tallest 
perhaps  about  fifteen  feet  high*  The  walks  seem  to  be  well 
laid  out  and  kept  in  good  order,  but  an  attempt  at  fountains 
is  a  miserable  failure,  as  are  also,  as  it  appears  to  me,  their 
clumps  of  trees.  These  groups  should  have  been  formed  of 
trees  widely  varying  in  the  colouring  of  the  foliage,  but  this 
has  not  been  attended  to.  No  attention  seems  to  be  paid  to 
the  timely  thinning  out  of  trees,  or  in  removing  wooden 
cradles  placed  for  protection,  round  very  young  trees  when 
first  planted,  and  now  no  longer  required,  but  still  allowed 
to  remain,  to  the  great  injury  of  the  lower  branches  of  many 
handsome  trees,  particularly  the  Norfolk  Island  pine.  This 
neglect  is  much  to  be  regretted,  for  the  injury  already  done 
to  these  beautiful  young  trees,  in  numerous  instances,  admits 
of  no  remedy.  These  gardens  abut  on  CoUingwood,  a  re- 
markably large  and  handsome  suburb  of  Melbourne.  Wide 
streets  of  one  and  a  half  chains,  formed  by  terraced  buildings, 
meet  the  eye  in  every  direction ;  and  a  dozen  churches,  at 
least,  might  be  seen  from  a  single  standpoint  The  streets 
are  kept  in  excellent  order.  In  the  evening  I  went  to  the 
Polytechnic  Hall  to  see  the  "  Octoroon "  performed.  The 
fioor  of  the  hall  was  divided  off  into  sixpenny,  shilling,  and 
two-shilling  seats,  the  latter  being  nearest  to  the  stage,  and 
the  sixpenny  the  farthest  from  it.  J.  H.  and  myself  repre- 
sented the  paying  occupants  of  the  two-shilling  seats  ;  in  the 
shilling  seats  there  was  a  fair  sprinkling  of  boys  and  a  few 
men  ;  but  the  sixpenny  seats  were  closely  packed  with  boys.  In 
all,  the  audience  consisted  of  about  400  persons — 380  boys 
about  twelve  years  of  age,  nineteen  hobbledyhoys,  one  man, 
and  one  female.  The  boys,  though  otherwise  well  behaved, 
occasionally  were  somewhat  uproarious  in  their  mirth ;  but 
whenever  this  was  a  little  too  loud,  it  was  instantly  checked 
when  the  black-bearded  face  of  a  burly  policeman,  who  was 
kept  at  hand  for  the  occasion,  showed  itself  peeping  round 
from  a  side  opening  into  the  pit ;  no  other  interference  was 
ever  required  of  him.  As  I  looked  upon  this  gathering  of 
boys,  such  as  I  had  never  seen  in  a  theatre  in  Europe,  I 
could  not  but  ask  myself  the  question,  whether  or  not  this 
attendance,  and  witnessing  theatrical  performances,  did  the 
boys  good  or  harm?     It  certainly  seemed  as  if  it  must  be 


59?      .  MR  CLARKE  IN  THE  PULPIT. 

prodoctiye  either  of  good  or  evil^  perhaps  a  mixture  of  both. 
These  boys  were  all  decentlj  dressed — in  fact,  yoa  seldom  or 
never  see  ragged  boys  in  the  streets  of  Melbourne;  they 
were  well  behaved,  never  noisy  whilst  the  acting  was  pro- 
gressing ;  and  for  a  poor  blind  girl  from  the  asylum,  who 
came  to  the  front  and  sang,  they  showed  more  than  ordinary 
good  feeling,  by  listening  most  attentively,  and  encouraging 
her  with  tumultuous  applause.  I  came  to  the  conclusion,  as 
I  watched  these  boys,  who  were,  wonderfully  attentive  during 
the  whole  performance,  that  so  long  as  the  pieces  presented 
to  them  were  moral  productions,  they  might  perhaps  be  pro- 
ductive of  good.  All  would  hinge,  I  thought,  on  the  character 
of  the  plays ;  and  I  did  not  see  why  useful  lessons  might  not 
be  conveyed  by  stage  performances  to  boys  at  their  very 
impressible  age. 

This  morning  I  attended  the  Baptist  Church  of  Mr  Clarke. 
I  had  heard  this  gentleman  deliver  a  clever  and  most  amusing 
lecture  a  few  nights  before  at  the  Temperance  Hall,  for  which 
he  was  paid  fifteen  guineas,  and  in  which  he  most  truthfully 
personified  Sarah  Gamp  and  Betsy  Prigg,  as  well  as  another 
comical  character  from  ^^  Pickwick,"  and  I  was  curious  to 
behold  him  in  the  pulpit  The  church  was  pretty  full — some 
four  or  five  hundred  persons — of  whom  300  were  ladies,  evi- 
dently a  choice  congregation.  The  building  is  so  shaped  and 
the  seats  so  arranged,  that  from  any  seat  the  whole  congre- 
gation might  be  seen  and  counted  without  difficulty.  This 
is  Whit-Sunday,  and  Mr  C.'s  sermon  appropriately  alluded 
to  the  Feast  of  Pentecost,  and  to  the  miracle  of  the  gift  to 
the  apostles  of  a  knowledge  of  many  tongues.  The  miracle 
was  an  undoubted  fact,  Mr  Clarke  said,  the  truth  of  which 
none  but  the  most  stupid  were  now  bold  enough  to  deny.  I 
left  his  church  with  the  impression  that  his  preaching  cer- 
tainly commanded  attention,  but  that  his  real  talent  lay  in 
delivering  humorous  lectures,  and  doubtless  he  would  shine 
too  on  the  stage. 

4tL — The  weather  was  particularly  fine,  and  I  bethought 
myself  that  I  would  take  a  trip  to  Wamambool,  the  great 
potato  producing  district  of  Victoria.  This,  perhaps,  had 
something  to  do  with  determining  me  to  visit  the  place  ;  bat 
Tower  Hill — a  hill  with  a  lake  lying  down  deep  in  the  centre  of 

0 


TRIP  TO  WARNAMBOOL.  *  593 

its  bosom,  some  400  feet  perhaps,  and  about  four  miles  round 
(though  the  lake  is  anything  but  round,  being  of  a  very  irregu- 
lar shape) — was  the  principal  attraction  that  took  me  to  this 
potato-growing,  pig-rearing  district ;  so  I  proceeded,  as  soon 
as  I  had  read  my  letters  I  had  just  received,  to  pack  up  a 
very  small  black  bag  and  make  ready  for  a  start,  for  there 
was  a  steamer,  the  Western^  to  leave  the  Queen^s  Wharf 
at  3  P.M.  At  that  hour  punctually  we  started.  The  weather 
was  all  we  could  desire ;  so,  after  a  quiet  passage  of  seventeen 
hours,  we  anchored  at  WarnambooL  There  is  but  little  shelter 
for  vessels  in  this  port,  unless  it  be  with  a  westerly  wind, 
and  then  a  reef  that  runs  out  some  half  mile  or  more  makes 
a  snug  basin  inside  for  vessels  to  lay  at  anchor;  with  an 
easterly  or  south-east  wind,  there  must  be  difficulty  in  loading 
or  discharging  cargo.  A  pretty  long  jetty  makes  landing 
passengers  always  practicable,  though  sometimes  difficult. 
The  town  of  Wamambool-  is  situated  about  a  mile  and  a  half 
from  the  landing  jetty ;  a  good  road  takes  you  to  it  I  put 
up  at  the  ^^  Western  Hotel/'  The  streets,  like  the  streets 
in  every  town  and  village  I  have  visited  in  Victoria,  are  laid 
out  in  straight  lines,  and  are  a  chain  and  a  half  wide,  or 
more  in  some  cases,  for  aught  I  know.  Of  conrse,  the  place 
is,  and  will  be  for  a  long  time  to  come,  but  a  skeleton  town : 
this  is  the  case  everywhere  in  this  colony,  or  pretty  nearly 
80,  Melbourne  being  almost  the  only  place  where  the  houses 
are  continuous  for  any  great  distance.  This  arises  from  the 
fact  of  a  large  site  being  laid  out  for  every  town  in  Victoria, 
and  the  buildings  being  commenced  simultaneously  at  all 
points  at  once  from  the  beginning.  It  may  be  that, 
just  in  the  vicinity  of  the  court-house,  the  post-office,  the 
banks,  and  the  principal  hotels,  the  houses  are  closer  together, 
and  form  something  like  finished  streets ;  but,  as  a  rule,  the 
buildings  are  scattered  all  over  the  site  from  end  to  end,  and 
Warnambool  is  no  exception.  In  all  these  new  places,  all 
Christian  sects  are  well  represented.  There  is  a  good  large, 
well-built  common  school  in  every  township,  and  a  large, 
respectable-looking  drill-room  for  the  volunteers ;  so  that  it 
may  be  said  the  Gk)vernment  in  no  stinted  measure  has 
provided  good  buildings  in  every  township  for  purposes  of 
education  and  of  defence  against  outward  attack  from  foes ; 

2p 


594  WARNAMBOOL, 

and  from  all  I  coald  leam^  both  classes  of  baildings  are  well 
attended,  and  are  doing  good  service.  On  more  than  one 
occasion,  my  attention  was  directed  to  ^'  shnt  np ''  denomina- 
tional schools  (Catholic)*  This  is  a  resnlt  in  the  right  direc- 
tion, for  it  is  only  by  mixing  together  the  children  of  parents 
of  all  denominations  irom  their  earliest  years  that  we  can 
hope  to  see  in  after-life  a  right  and  proper  feeling  nniversal 
among  grown-np  people,  be  their  creeds  what  they  may.  This 
want  of  toleration  among  the  different  sects  of  Christians  is 
really  a  wonderful  affair.  It  was  only  the  other  day  that  I 
heard  a  lady  say  she  had  a  horror  of  Unitarians,  and  could 
not  bear  to  see  one  of  them  come  within  her  doors.  ^'  And 
what;"  said  I,  ^^ about  a  Mahometan?  would  you  shut  yonr  door 
in  his  face  too  ?  "  "  Oh  no  I  "  she  replied ;  "  that  would  be  a 
different  matter  quite.*'  In  what  the  difference  consisted  that 
should  provoke  such  different  treatment  I  failed  to  discover. 
The  absurdity  of  the  feeling  was  further  elucidated  by  one  of  the 

lady's  children  remarking  that  her  playmates,  the  Misses , 

who  constantly  came  to  the  house,  were  Unitarians ;  bnt  the 
poor  lady  did  not  know  it 

Every  place,  be  it  large  or  small,  has  its  own  lion,  and 
Warnambool  is  not  an  exception  to  the  rule.  The  lion  of 
Warnambool  is  Tower  Hill,  a  hill  about  nine  miles  from  the 
town,  the  summit  of  which  may  be  fonr  or  five  hundred  feet 
above  the  sea.  So  as  soon  as  I  had  had  breakfast,  the  landlord 
offered  to  drive  me  to  see  this  wonder.  It  is  situated  half 
way  between  Warnambool  and  Belfast,  and  though  the  country 
is  everywhere  undulating,  the  rise  towards  it  is  gradual.  As 
I  have  said  already,  in  the  centre  of  this  hill  is  a  lake,  down 
in  the  bottom,  almost  upon  a  level  with  the  sea,  400  feet,  of 
very  irregular  shape,  and  in  circumference  some  four  miles. 
Over  a  great  part  of  this  lake  the  rushes  and  grasses  growing 
there  show  the  water  to  be  very  shallow;  a  circular  pool, 
perhaps  a  mile  round,  being  the  only  part  in  which  there  is 
deep  water.  The  only  fish  in  the  lake  are  eels,  and  they  are 
everywhere.  There  is  a  hill,  very  undulating,  which  has  thrust 
itself  up  in  the  middle  of  the  lake,  and  the  summit  of  it  maj 
possibly  be  higher  than  any  part  of  the  rim  surrounding  the 
lake,  of  which  the  northern  side,  for  a  mile  or  more,  is  onlj 
some  twenty  feet  above  the  surface  of  the  pool.   On  approach- 


WARNAMBOOL.  595 

ing  it  from  Warnambool,  you  come  suddenly,  without  any  warn- 
ing, upon  the  rim  of  the  crater,  for  crater  of  an  extinct  vol- 
cano it  certainly  is  ;  and  the  view  from  this  standing-point, 
as  the  eye  wanders  round  this  gulf,  and  down  into  it,  is 
very  striking.  The  descent  to  the  water  is  here  pretty  well 
on  to  being  perpendicular,  covered  with  leaves,  brushwood, 
green  sward,  and  dead  and  dying  trees.  All  the  large  trees 
round  about  this  crater,  and  on  the  island  in  the  centre  of  it, 
none  of  them  very  large  by  the  by,  from  some  cause  or  other 
are  either  dead  or  dying;  probably  from  having  exhausted 
the  whole  goodness  of  the  thin  coating  of  soil  which  here- 
abouts covers  the  substratum  of  blue  stone  which  is  seen 
everywhere  cropping  up  above  the  surface.  A  rich  black-and- 
chocolate  coating  of  soil,  covering  blue  stone  near  to  the  hill, 
and  sandstone  as  you  recede  from  it,. extends  for  a  consider- 
able area  all  around,  very  thin  generally,  though  of  consider- 
able depth  in  some  parts.  All  this  rich  land,  or  at  least  to 
the  extent  of  some  20,000  acres,  is  owned  by  a  squatter,  Mr 
Rutledge.  It  is  here  that  vast  quantities  of  potatoes  are 
grown,  and  pigs  fed,  under  the  management  of  Irish  farmers, 
who,  for  the  most  part,  are  yearly  tenants.  The  operation  is 
this: — The  ground  is  planted  with  potatoes  afteroneploughing; 
in  eight  months  the  crop  is  removed  from  it,  and  the  land  then 
reverts  to  Mr  Rutledge,  who,  after  harrowing  it,  or  giving  the 
land  a  single  ploughing,  sows  it  with^jzr  (rape,  I  believe),  and 
in  about  a  month  turns  sheep  in  upon  it,  and  keeps  them  there 
for  four  months,  when  Pat  again  takes  possession,  and  puts  in 
another  crop  of  potatoes.  For  this  land  Mr  K  receives  a  rent 
varying  from  £3  to  £5  an  acre,  according  to  the  quantity  of 
land.  Paddocks  of  from  sixty  to  a  hundred  acres  pay  him 
about  £3,  and  are  sublet  in  small  quantities  at  £5  an  acre* 
Mr  K  is  constantly  taking  back  these  potato-paddocks  and 
laying  them  down  in  grass,  supplying  the  cockatoo  farmers 
with  fresh  land,  old  pastures  broken  up  afresh.  If  it  were 
not  for  this  operation  of  sowing  ^;2r,  and  turning  in  sheep 
upon  it,  the  land  would  soon  become  impoverished.  I  am 
told  that  six  to  seven  tons  the  acre  is  an  average  crop  of 
potatoes  around  Warnambool,  though  sometimes  thirteen  tons 
to  the  acre  are  produced.  A  fair  quantity  of  oats,  wheat, 
and  barley  is  also  grown  here.     Oaten-hay — as  it  is  called 


59^  IVARNAMBOOL. 

here — i&j  in  some  qnantity,  conBomed  wholly  by  horses.  The 
oats  are  cat  after  the  grain  has  become  sufficiently  hard  not 
to  shell  out  during  the  drying  and  maldng  into  hay;  the 
price  for  this  fodder  is  from  fifty  shillings  to  sixty  shillings 
the  ton.  Wamambool  contains  800  inhabitants.  Labourers, 
male  and  female,  are  wanted  in  the  district  The  housemaid 
in  this  hotel  gets  £30  a  year  wages ;  the  woman  cook,  thirty^ 
five  shillings  a  week ;  a  waiter  (man-senrant),  twenty-five  shil- 
lings a  week ;  men  employed  on  the  road  breaking  stones 
earn  seven  shillings  a  day ;  some  of  them  earn  double  that, 
breaking  three  yards  a  day  at  four  shillings  and  ninepence 
per  yard ;  agricultural  labourers,  five  shillings  a  day ;  all  ex- 
cept the  stone-breakers  get  their  tucker  or  grub  into  the  bar- 
gain. The  Hopkins  is  a  river  running  into  the  sea  on  the 
eastern  side  of  the  port ;  the  country  about  it  for  a  few  mil^ 
from  its  mouth  struck  me  as  being  very  picturesque.  The 
rirer  is  well  stocked  with  bream  and  crayfish,  or  crabs  I  be- 
lieve they  are.  It  is  of  considerable  width  for  three  or  four 
miles  from  its  mouth,  but  a  bar  prevents  the  entrance  into  it  of 
boats  from  the  sea.  The  Mirri  is  a  small  river  also  close  to 
Wamambool.  From  Tower  Hill  I  had  a  good  view  of  the 
country  around  and  of  the  sea-coast,  taking  in  Belfast,  nine 
miles  distant,  though  we  were  so  high  above  it  that  it  did  not 
look  more  than  half  that  distance  off.  Beyond  Belfast  is 
Portland,  the  last  pcH't,  I  believe,  on  the  Victorian  coast 

1th. — At  1  P.M.  on  4th  I  got  upon  the  box-seat  of  Cobb's 
coach  running  between  Wamambool  and  Geelong,  and  after 
taking  charge  of  the  letter-bags  at  the  post-office,  we  started. 
The  weather  was  fine,  and  I  enjoyed  the  drive.  We  reached 
Camperdown  at  7.36  p.m.,  forty-five  miles.  Prom  this  point  I 
allowed  the  coach  to  go  on  without  me,  preferring  to  pass 
the  night  in  a  comfortable  bed  in  a  very  fair  inn  to  pursuing 
the  journey  in  the  dark.  The  road  we  had  come  over  was 
metalled,  with  the  exception  of  about  twelve  miles,  over  which 
we  had  to  thread  our  way  as  we  best  could,  through  quagmires 
and  among  stumps  of  trees.  We  passed  through  a  good  deal 
of  wooded  country  and  some  good  land,  and  through  the 
township  of  Lerang,  a  promising  settlement  At  8  a.m.  I  was 
en  route  again  by  another  of  Cobb's  coaches  running  between 
Geelong  and  Camperdown,  and  we  arrived  in  Greelong  at 


WARNAMBOOL  TO  GEELONG,  597 

5.30  P.M.,  distance  seventy-six  miles,  over  a  good  macad- 
amised road  all  the  way,  passing  through  the  finest  agricul- 
tural section  of  the  colony.  Black's,  Robertson's,  Hopkins', 
and  the  celebrated  Barwon  estates,  all  skirt  this  road.  The 
last  named  contains  some  fifty  thousand  acres,  and  they  say 
the  owner  of  it  refused  an  offer  for  it,  made  to  him  a  few 
months  ago,  of  half  a  million  sterling.  Verily  these  squatters 
have  become  the  lords  of  the  soil,  and  in  the  teeth  of  a  recent 
law  forbidding  any  sale  of  Government  land  for  more  than 
350  acres  being  made  to  any  one  person.  Still  these  squat- 
terS)  now  become  rich,  go  onadding,  by  hook  or  by  crook,  to 
their  already  too  large  holdings.  Too  late  the  Government 
has  opened  its  eyes  to  the  evil  of  allowing  individuals  to  be- 
come possessed  of  enormous  tracts  of  the  finest  land  in  the 
colony  for  sheep-runs,  to  the  great  prejudice  of  the  would-be 
farmers,  covering  the  land  with  sheep  and  cattle  in  place  of 
a  human  population.  We  passed  many  towns  on  this  route, 
of  which  perhaps  Colac  was  the  most  important.  Every- 
where we  saw  signs  of  wealth  and  comfort,  comfortable  habi- 
tations and  well-kept  fences.  No  poverty  anywhere,  all  well 
clothed,  and  doubtless  well  fed.  At  Geelong  I  put  up  at 
Mack's  hotel,  to  my  mind  the  best-arranged  and  best-man- 
aged hotel  I  have  been  at  in  Australia.  At  8.30  this  morn- 
ing left  by  rail,  and  reached  Melbourne  at  10.30,  a  couple  of 
hours. 

9th. — ^A  popular  author,  in  a  late  work  on  these  colonies, 
alludes  to  the  little  respect  paid  by  the  young  to  the  old 
people.  May  not  this  arise  from  many  of  the  young  people 
being  descended  from  lags?  Ho  doubt  society  will  be  in- 
clined to  treat  with  much  more  respect  a  ^'  ne'er-do-well," 
being  the  son  of  a  lord,  than  the  best  and  most  useful  maa 
in  the  colony  if  he  be  the  son  of  a  lag.  Common  sense  ia 
nowadays  forcing  its  way  to  the  front  all  over  the  world, 
and  in  time  we  may  hope  for  a  more  just  standard  of  worth 
to  be  the  guide  of  the  opinion  of  society.  A  friend  of  mine 
asked  me  lately  why  a  man,  whose  worth  in  the  world  was 
gauged  by  that  of  his  illustrious  ancestors,  was  like  a 
potato  ?  "  Why,"  he  said,  "  all  that  is  worth  anything  of 
either  is  buried  under-ground." 

Yesterday  I  went  to  hear  Miss  Turner,  a  lady  who  conducts 


S98  MELBOURNE. 

the  Benrice  in  a  small  Unitarian  Chorcli  in  this  city.  In  illus- 
tration of  a  portion  of  her  sermon,  she  said  that  it  was  only 
the  other  day  that  the  greatest  authority  in  Melbourne  on 
orthodoxy  (tiie  Protestant  Bishop  Perry),  expressed  himself 
in  doubt  as  to  whether  the  souls  condemned  to  hell-fire  re- 
mained there,  suffering  to  all  eternity,  or  were  oonsnmed 
there  and  then.  Miss  Turner  remarked  that  that  expression 
of  opinion  was  a  sign  of  the  advance  of  national  thought 
No  bishop,  she  said,  would  have  dared  to  have  so  expressed 
himself  ten  years  ago,  or  would  have  dared  to  doubt  that  our 
souls  remained  in  hell  to  all  eternity.  As  for  myself,  I  could 
not  but  think  at  the  time,  that  if  our  souls  were  capable  of 
resisting  the  consuming  power  of  hell-fire  for  all  eternity, 
that  they  must  surely  be  made  of  asbestos,  that  being  the 
only  substance  I  could  remember  at  the  moment  as  inde- 
structible by  fire. 

13tA. — Last  night  I  spent  a  couple  of  hours  in  the  hall  of 
the  Legislative  Assembly,  listening  to  a  debate  on  Mr  Francis's 
newly-introduced  electoral  bill  dividing  Victoria  into  single 
electoral  districts,  every  district  to  elect  its  own  member,  a 
single  one,  and  doing  away  with  plural  votes,  that  is,  votes 
given  in  virtue  of  freeholds,  held,  perhaps,  in  different  parts 
of  the  colony.  This  new  arrangement  of  electoral  districts 
will  add  twelve  more  members  to  the  seventy-eight  at  pre- 
sent constituting  the  Assembly,  making  the  number  ninety, 
and  adding  £3600  (£300  for  each  of  the  twelve)  to  the 
annual  expenses  of  the  colony.  It  seems  likely  the  measure 
may  pass  in  the  Lower  Chamber,  but  be  thrown  out  in  the 
Upper. 

To  the  Upper  Chamber  I  have  only  paid  one  visit  It  sits 
bat  seldom,  and  then  only  for  an  hour  or  two  at  a  time ;  in 
fact,  this  Upper  House  has  no  business  before  it,  hardly  a 
single  bill  having  been  sent  up  since  the  Parliament  opened. 
It  is  composed  principally  of  squatters,  the  lords  of  the  land, 
and  other  wealthy  individuals.  In  spite  of  the  recent  Land 
Act,  which  it  seems  has  come  too  late  to  prevent  the  mischief, 
the  squatters  have  become  extensive  territorial  and  wealthy 
men,  and  notwithstanding  all  recent  legislation  is  intended 
to  prevent  the  accumulation  of  landed  property  in  the  hands 
of  individuals,  and  to  favour  the  taking  up  of  sections  of  350 


MELBOURNE.  599 

acres  ordy  by  any  one  individual,  these  wealthy  sqnattere,  who 
have  lately  had  a  great  accession  to  their  wealth  by  the  higher 
Talue  of  wool  in  Eorope  and  of  cattle  in  Australia,  continue 
to  add  ^' field  to  fi/tld'*'*  by  purchases  from  needy  small  land- 
holders, and  perhaps  by  other  means  also.  They  may^ 
indeed,  be  said  now  to  be  in  possession  of  the  bulk  of  the 
best  land  in  Victoria,  all  employed  in  cattle  and  sheep  runs, 
and  thus  impeding  what  is  so  desirable  in  a  young  country, 
the  cultivation  of  the  soil  by  a  free  and  industrial  popula- 
tion. These  landlords  are,  however,  threatened  with  a  pro- 
perty-tax, and  I  should  not  be  surprised  to  see  them  before 
long  pretty  heavily  taxed  in  that  direction ;  and  so  they 
should  be,  I  think. 

Vlth. — This  morning  paid  a  visit  to  the  University  Museum 
for  the  purpose  of  looking  at  the  meteoric  stone  found  close 
to  Dandenong  some  few  years  ago.  Its  weight  is  thirty  cwt. ; 
one  corner  of  it  has  been  cut  off  and  polished.  It  is  supposed, 
originally,  before  it  fell  to  earth,  to  have  formed  one  with 
the  four-ton  meteorite,  which  fell  at  the  same  time,  and  is 
now  in  the  British  Museum. 

26M,  en  hoard  a  P.  aaid  0.  steamer. — On  18th,  at  4  p.m.,  we 
weighed  anchor  at  Sandridge  and  started  for  Point  de  Galle. 
We  have  some  ninety  passengers,  of  whom  seventy  are  first- 
class,  so  that  we  are  pretty  well  packed.  Fortunately,  through 
the  kindness  of  Mr  M.,  I  am  located  in  a  small  cabin,  of  which 
there  are  three  in  the  ship,  with  only  one  berth  in  it.  Head 
winds  prevented  our  reaching  King  George's  Sound  until  the 
sixth  day ;  distance,  1340  miles.  Coaled  and  left  the  same 
day.  A  Lascar,  just  as  we  were  leaving,  fell  overboard, 
striking  his  head  against  the  side  of  a  coal-launch  as  he  fell. 
He  was  picked  up  quickly,  but  died  soon  afterwards  from  the 
blow  he  had  received,  and  was  committed  to  the  deep  so 
soon  as  we  got  out  clear  of  the  port.  Poor  fellow,  the  inci- 
dent created  no  sensation,  it  was  only  a  native  I 

29th. — We  have  been  making  good  way.  Caught  the  south- 
east trade  in  31^  Weather  pleasant.  Thermometer  in  my 
cabin,  70^ 

9th  July. — Arrived  at  Galle  yesterday  at  7  a.m. 

\Zthj  on  board  the  ^Peshxirmr.^ — At  midnight  on  the  9th, 
by  the  aid  of  a  full  moon  and  clear  weather,  we  got  under 


6oo  GALLE, 

way,  and  moved  safely  out  of  Galle,  where  we  have  been 
employed  from  the  hour  of  the  Peshanmr^s  arrival  from 
Calcutta  on  the  morning  of  the  9th  taking  on  board  cargo 
from  the  Sunda.  The  cargo  consists  of  tea  and  silk,  and  from 
the  handling  the  packages  received,  being  pitched  one  by 
one  from  the  deck  of  the  Sunda  into  the  lighters  alongside, 
some  eight  or  ten  feet,  and  afterwards  pitched  up  on  board 
this  craft  in  the  same  way,  and  rnn  down  into  the  hold  on  a 
sloping  plank,  bringing  up  at  the  bottom  against  an  iron 
stanchion,  the  packages  of  tea  will  come  oat  in  South- 
ampton pretty  well  battered  I  should  think.  For  silk  it 
may  be  all  very  well,  for  it  may  be  knocked  about  a  good 
deal  without  injury  to  the  packages.  When  we  heard  at 
Galle  that  we  were  to  have  the  largest  of  the  company's 
fleet  to  take  us  to  Suez,  we  luxuriated  in  anticipation  of 
abundance  of  room,  but  we  have  been  wofully  disappointed; 
for  the  whole  ship,  and  many  of  the  passengers'  cabins,  is 
crammed  with  cargo,  and  the  passengers,  consequently,  with 
few  exceptions,  are  packed  three  in  a  cabin,  not  a  very 
agreeable  arrangement  in  this  hot  weather,  the  thermo- 
meter standing  88*  in  our  cabins.  In  fact,  though  so  large 
a  ship,  very  nearly  double  the  tonnage  of  the  Bangalore^  it 
is  only  in  the  size  of  the  saloon  that  we  have  any  advantage 
over  that  craft.  For  a  smoking-room,  a  large  slice  of  the 
after-part  of  the  deck  is  curtained  off,  thus  depriving  the 
passengers  generally  of  abundance  of  room  for  exercise 
which  they  would  otherwise  enjoy. 

IQth, — Our  fine  weather  continues,  and  so  does  the  S.W. 
monsoon  pretty  nearly  in  our  teeth,  so  that  our  progress  iB 
somewhat  slow.  At  Calcutta  the  Peshawur  filled  her  lower 
hold  with  jute,  rice,  wheat,  and  some  other  heavy  cargo, 
which  accounts  for  our  somewhat  sand-bargy  appearance  and 
slow  rate  of  steaming.  One  advantage  there  is  in  this 
big  ship  over  the  Bangalore^  she  goes  along  very  steadily, 
though  not  very  fast  At  Galle  we  took  on  board  a  sick 
English  sailor  from  the  hospitaL  He  died  the  day  before 
yesterday,  and  was  buried  in  the  wide  ocean. 

22<i — Yesterday  about  7  a.m.  we  anchored  at  Aden,  our 
fine  weather  having  continued  all  the  way  from  Oalle.  The 
S.W.   monsoon   has  been  strong  certainly,  and  for  a  few 


ADEN.  60 1 

hours  off  Socotra  we  experienced  a  sharp  gale.  The  thermo- 
meter in  my  cabin  has  rarely  reached  90"",  though  constantly 
bordering  upon  it,  and  once,  I  believe,  it  rose  a  degree 
above.  The  fresh  breeze,  however,  which  we  have  had  every 
day  since  we  left  Galle — for  we  have  never  experienced  one 
quite  calm  day,  nor  one  day  with  the  wind  quite  aft — ^has 
kept  us  cool ;  and  if  it  only  lasts  five  or  six  days  more,  it 
will  not  be  a  matter  of  much  consequence  to  us  whether  it 
then  leaves  us  or  not.  On  our  arrival  at  Aden,  we  found 
several  of  the  P.  and  O.'s  boats  there,  and  a  Dutch  steamer 
with  900  troops  on  board,  having  had  to  take  on  board,  be- 
sides her  own  quantum  embarked  at  Antwerp,  300  men,  the 
cargo  of  a  companion  steamer  which  had  got  stranded  on  a 
coral  reef  as  the  two  ships  were  coming  down  the  Bed  Sea 
together.  There  were  also  two  merchant  steamers  bound 
eastwards,  I  believe,  and  several  sailing  vessels.  So  soon  as 
we  had  fortified  ourselves  with  breakfast,  we  took  passage  in 
a  shore-boat,  landed,  and  without  loss  of  time  hired  a 
vehicle  and  started  off  for  the  lion  of  Aden,  the  tanks,  five 
miles  distant  from  the  port,  and  situated  in  a  gorge  over- 
looking the  town  of  Aden,  containing  the  Government 
ofiSces  and  other  buildings,  the  barracks^  and  a  chang- 
ing population  of  Arabs  amounting  to  some  20,000  souls, 
should  these  Arabs  have  souls  at  all,  which  I  trust 
ttiey  have  not,  for  if  they  have,  by  many  sects  among  us 
Christians  they  will  certainly  be  condemned  to  eternal  damna- 
tion. Let  us  charitably  hope,  then,  that  the  Arabs  of  Aden 
are  soulless.  There  is  a  capital  road  all  the  way  to  the  town 
from  the  port,  and  through  the  town  to  the  gorge  containing 
the  tanks.  These  tanks,  nine  of  them,  are  of  various  sizes, 
and  completely  fill  the  gorge.  They  tell  me,  but  I  don't 
know  for  certain,  for  I  have  never  read  any  account  of  this 
part  of  Arabia — I  mean,  of  its  ancient  history — ^that  when 
we  took  possession  of  Aden^  we  found  in  this  gorge  the  re- 
mains of  an  ancient  system  of  tanks,  and  that  with  all  the 
money  we  have  spent- — some  millions  they  say — we  have 
only  built  on  what  we  found  there.  At  any  rate,  we  have 
now  made  tanks  so  large,  that  they  are  never  likely  to  be.  . 
filled  by  any  ordinary  rainfall.  A  second  deluge  will  be  re- 
quired to  make  them  a  bumper.    The  only  one  with  any 


6o2  ADEN. 

water  in  it  is  the  apper  one,  and  that  may  hare  three  to  four 
feet  of  water.  They  have  never  been  anything  like  filled  since 
they  were  finished.  There  are  three  or  four  wells  in  these 
tanks,  of  a  considerable  depth,  and  firom  these  the  town 
derives  a  supply  of  brackish  water.  The  water  contained  in 
the  upper  tank  was  quite  fresh.  It  seems  it  is  necessary  to 
go  deep  in  order  to  find  brackish  water.  These  wells  seem 
to  produce  a  large  quantity  of  water.  Just  before  you  reach 
the  tank,  you  find  a  little  shelter  under  trees  that  have  been 
planted  within  a  few  years.  The  story  of  the  ancient  tanks 
may  be  true,  but  certain  it  is  that  every  part  of  the  present 
tanks  bears  the  impress  of  recent  construction.  They  are  of 
stone.  The  wind  blew  very  freshly  during  our  visit  to  the 
tanks,  and  as  it  was  unaccompanied  by  dust,  it  made  our 
drive  a  very  pleasant  one.  It  took  us  about  two  hoars  to 
get  back  to  the  port  At  four  we  were  on  board  ship  again, 
making  the  best  of  our  way  towards  the  Straits  of  Babel- 
mandel,  through  which  we  passed  this  morning  about  half- 
past  six.  At  Aden  we  had  an  accession  to  our  passenger 
list,  for  we  took  on  board  the  Behar^s  passengers  (that 
steamer  having  broken  down),  twenty-five  first-class  adults, 
besides  a  number  of  little  children,  and  some  thirty  or  forty 
second-class  passengers,  making  up  our  number  to  something 
like  108  first-class  adults  besides  children,  and  some  sixty  or 
more  second-class,  jamming  us  up  pretty  tightly,  four  in  a 
cabin  in  many  cases.  Well,  this  would  not  be  a  large  num- 
ber for  so  large  a  vessel  as  the  PestumuTy  were  she  with  only 
a  moderate  amount  of  cargo  on  board — ^that  is,  were  the 
room  properly  set  apart  for  passenger  acconmiodation  really 
applicable  for  that  purpose.  This,  however,  is  not  the  case. 
There  is  cargo  everywhere — ^in  the  cabins,  in  the  passages, 
on  the  hatchways— -everywhere,  in  fact,  there  is  carga  There 
is  no  current  of  air,  no  room  for  it  anywhere  between  decks, 
and  this  too  in  the  month  of  July,  and  in  the  Bed  Sea,  with 
the  thermometer  at  my  elbow  standing  at  upwards  of  90*. 

23<i — Last  night,  while  all  was  jollity  and  merriment  on 
the  quarterdeck,  ladies  in  groups  doubtless  talking  scandal, 
gentlemen  discussing  the  route  to  be  chosen  on  their  arrival 
at  Suez,  and  a  party  of  young  military  officers  at  the  ex- 
tremity of  the  quarterdeck  (the  smoking-room)  singing  at 


A  DEATH  ON  BOARD,  603 

the  top  of  their  voices,  noisily  and  jollily,  "  one-bottle-more  " 
songs,  a  passenger  dropped  dead.  The  doctor  was  loudly 
called  for  \  but  this  is  a  big  ship,  and  it  was  a  good  half 
hour  before  he  could  be  found.  As  the  age  of  miracles  seems 
to  have  passed  away,  the  doctor's  aid  was  fruitless.  The 
victim  from  the  first  was  past  his  skill.  His  death  must 
have  been  instantaneous.  He  was  a  strongly-built  middle- 
aged  man,  who  had  been  many  years  in  Victoria  without  having 
done  any  good  for  himself,  and  was  now  on  his  way  home  to 
enter  upon  the  possession  of  property  which  had  just  fallen 
in  to  him.  As  I  lay  in  my  berth  last  night  I  could  not 
easily  discard  the  remembrance  of  this  occurrence.  The 
death  was  instantaneous,  and  the  soul,  to  what  point  did 
it  direct  its  course  when  so  suddenly  called  to  vacate 
its  earthly  tenement?  Did  it  go  straight  to  heaven,  up 
somewhere  among  the  myriads  of  stars  shining  brightly 
overhead,  when  it  started  oflF  on  its  journey?  or  did 
it  go  down  down  to  hell,  that  dark  pit  where  all  that 
reaches  it  remains  for  ever,  ever  burning  in  unquenchable  fire, 
but  never  consuming  ?  or  did  it  pass  away  into  that  limbo 
where  some  think  it  would  remain  in  a  torpid  state  until 
awakened  up  to  judgment  by  the  sound  of  the  last  trumpet? 
Into  which  of  these  three  places  did  our  friend's  soul  fly  last 
night  ?  To  one  of  these  three  it  must  have  been,  or  at  least 
so  believe  all  good  Protestants.  I  discard  purgatory  alto- 
gether, although  it  was  only  the  other  day,  on  a  grand  festi- 
val, that  thousands  of  pounds  were  paid  to  the  priests  to 
enlist  their  help  to  extricate  the  soul  of  the  late  French 
Emperor  from  that  half-way  house !  Nevertheless,  I  discard 
it  altogether;  it  looks  too  rational  an  institution,  too  much 
like  the  work  of  human  hands  and  minds  to  be  believed  in 
by  the  faithful ;  too  much,  in  fact,  like  an  invention  for 
enriching  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  and  too  little  spiri- 
tualistic. Doubtless  our  friend's  soul  must  have  gone  either 
to  heaven  or  to  hell,  I  think.  At  least,  so  we  are  taught 
by  the  thousands  of  men  whose  business  it  is  to  instruct  us 
in  this  class  of  matter.  Our  friend's  soul  must  now  be  siU 
ting  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Creator  of  all  things,  or  it  is 
down  in  hell  roasting  in  brimstone,  there  to  remain  for 
eternity !    What  a  dreadful  belief  this  is  I  But  so  it  is ;  there 


6o4  A  BURIAL. 

is  DO  escape  from  it ;  I  have  heard  it  so  said  in  the  pulpit  ft 
hundred  times,  ay,  a  thousand  times.     I  have   heard  Dr 

C describe  the  two  places,  the  abode  of  bliss  and  the 

abode  of  misery,  so  often,  and  with  such  precision,  and  no 
doubt  with  perfect  accuracy,  that  I  have  sometimes  thought 
he  must  really  have  managed  to  have  had  at  least  a  real 
peep  at  both  places,  if  he  did  not  succeed  in  paying  them 
both  a  prolonged  visit  As  to  limbo  being  the  place  in 
which  our  immortal  souls  take  refuge  when  driven  from  our 
bodies,  there  arise  difficulties  insurmountable  to  such  a 
belief,  I  think ;  so  we  must  give  it  up. 

At  7. SO  this  morning  we  buried  poor  C ,  and  if  the 

limbo  theory  after  all  should  be  the  true  one,  why  G 

must  now  be  down  among  the  host  of  Pharaoh,  for  w^  buried 
him  somewhere  about  the  spot  where  that  worthy  got  his 
quietus  when  endeavouring  to  catch  up  and  to  demolish 
Moses  and  his  crew  of  spoilers.  The  Egyptians  of  four 
thousand  years  ago  would  doubtless  give  a  hearty  reception 
to  a  poor  devil  of  a  Christian  of  the  nineteenUi  century, 
thrust  so  unceremoniously  and  so  suddenly  among  them. 

C was  launched  into  the  sea,  as  I  have  already  said, 

from  the  wide  starboard  gangway  on  the  main  deck  at  8  A.1C. 
on  23d.  At  8  p.m.  on  the  same  day,  this  gangway,  being  a 
deep,  roomy,  and  cool  place,  was  chosen  as  a  site  for  a  con- 
cert, and  was  soon  filled  with  ladies  and  gentlemen  passengers, 
who  kept  up  a  joyous  meeting  there  for  many  hours.  So  little 
is  thought  on  board  ship  of  an  occasional  death  I  When  it 
does  take  place,  the  impression  it  leaves  on  the  survivors  is 
very  transient;  five  minutes  after  the  body  is  consigned  to  its 
grave,  the  event  is  forgotten  I  We. must  be  very  selfish,  I 
am  afraid,  on  board  ship ;  one  would  suppose  the  contrary 
would  be  the  case  in  so  circumscribed  an  area ;  but  it  is  not 
Unless  the  death  happens  among  your  own  kith  and  kin,  it  is 
soon  forgotten. 

Vlth. — ^At  7  A.1L  we  hauled  into  the  dock  at  Suez;  a 
dozen  steamers  or  more  are  there  lying  at  anchor.  Here  we 
got  rid  of  more  than  fifty  of  our  passengers,  who  proceeded 
hence  to  Alexandria  by  rail,  and  afterwards  homewards  by 
Brindisi.  At  5  p.m.  we  hauled  out  of  dock  and  entered  the 
mouth  of  the  canal  on  our  way  to  Port  Said ;  got  aground 


ARRIVAL  AT  SUEZ.  605 

• 

when  we  had  proceeded  Bome  fonr  or  fire  miles,  and  so  soon 
as  we  were  afloat  again ,  we  made  fast  to  the  bank,  and 
remained  there  until  five  next  morning,  when  we  were  again 
under  way,  and  continued  steaming  until  we  reached  the 
twentieth  milestone,  where  we  brought  up  for  the  night. 
We  were  early  under  way  the  next  morning,  and  we  reached 
Port  Said  at  9  A.M.  The  Peshawur  passed  through  without 
stopping,  and  I  went  on  shore  in  the  pilot-boat.  Being  dis- 
appointed in  finding  a  steamer  for  Jaffa,  I  took  the  postal 
boat  for  Ismailia,  and  thence  went  by  rail  to  Alexandria, 
and  so  on  homewards  by  Brindisi,  Venice,  and  Vienna. 


THS  END. 


nUMTIO  BY  BAIXANTYNB  AKD  COMrAkY 
BDIKMrRCH  AND  LONDON 


