^WEUNIVER%. 


Si    1' 


/O/- 


^10S7\NC 
o 


g   ^ 


J' 

O 


^WEUNIVERi"// 


^^WE•UNIVER% 


^Of-CALIF0% 


^<?Aaviian-# 


.^fllBRARYQc,       ^^-IIBRARYQ^^         aWEUNIVERS/^       ^10SAK( 

mrdimt  utiles 


•&  ^""^     ^^  ^^  "^ 


'^OJIIVOJO^        -^(HOJIIVJJ 


^\^EUNIVERSyA 


o 


vvlOSANCElfx> 

o 


■^/sa3AiNn-iuv 


^OFCAUFOff^      ^OFCAlIFOi 


^llIBRARYQ^ 


^IIIBRARYQ<^ 


^OJUVDJO"^ 


30 


.^WEUNIVERS/A 


vS:lOSANCEl, 
o 


.^,OFCA1IFO% 

00 


aofcaiifo/?^ 


,\WEUNIVER% 


^<?Aav!ian-^^     "^^^Aavaaiii^       <rii]ONvso^>^'^ 


Or 

O 


aWEDNIVERS//, 


.^V^OS^tElfx^ 


<ril30NVS01^''         %a3AINn3WV 


^HIBRARYQ^       ^HlBRARt 


^(!/0JllV3JO'^       -^d/OJIWJ-J 


^WEUNIVER5'//V 


, ,, .      ^  o 

^TilJONVSOl^ 


vvlOSANCElfx> 


^ofcalifo/?^ 


^Ay3AiN(]-3Wv        ^<?Aaviian# 


^ 


^^lllBRARYQ^       ^HIBRARYQ^ 

iJUlTi  iJUlTl 


AWEUNIVER^/^ 


EVERY  AGE   LIBRARY 


ACROSS   SIBERIA 


By   CHARLES   WENYON,    M.D. 


THE  PUBLISHER  OF  THE  EVERY  AGE 
LIBRARY  WILL  BE  PLEASED  TO  SEND, 
POST  FREE,  PARTICULARS  OF 
VOLUMES    READY  &    CONTEMPLATED 


the  scope  of  the  series 
will  comprise  books  in 
tpie  following  cate- 
gories :  travel,  biography, 
fiction,  poetry,  religion, 
modern  missionary  enter- 
prise, belles  lettres, 
translation  of  classical 
:masterpieces,  adventure, 
school  life,  &  fairy  tales 


/  \ 


PREFACE 

In  the  preface  to  the  four  earUer  editions  of 
this  book  it  was  said  that  the  great  post-road  of 
Siberia  would,  ere  long,  be  superseded  by  the 
railway,  as  the  old  post-roads  of  Britain  had 
been.  That  is  now  an  accomplished  fact.  Ex- 
press trains  run  from  Moscow  to  Lake  Baikal, 
and  from  Lake  Baikal  to  Vladivostock.  In  the 
vast  and  little  known  regions,  north  and  south, 
there  will  not,  for  years  to  come,  be  any  more 
comfortable  and  expeditious  mode  of  travel 
than  sledge  and  tarantass.  But,  east  and  west, 
a  journey  which  then  involved  many  months 
of  difficult  and  hazardous  wayfaring  can  now 
be  performed  in  less  than  half  the  number  of 
weeks,  and  with  no  more  hardship  and  exposure 
than  one  may  expect  to  meet  with  in  a  first- 
class  railway  carriage,  with  well-warmed,  double- 
windowed  compartments,  and  well-appointed 
sleeping-cars  and  restaurant.  This  more  rapid 
and  luxurious  mode  of  travel  has,  however,  one 
drawback.  It  takes  us  through  the  country 
without   seeing   it.     It   does   not   permit   us   to 


6  PREFACE 

observe  even  the  configuration  of  the  land  to 
the  best  advantage,  nor  to  enter  at  all  into  those 
intimate  relations  with  the  people,  without 
which  it  is  impossible  to  understand  the  con- 
ditions of  life  among  them.  Crossing  the 
country,  as  I  did,  sixteen  years  ago,  I  spent 
much  more  time  upon  the  way  than  travellers 
do  now,  but  I  saw  much  more  both  of  the  country 
and  the  people.  In  the  following  pages  I  have 
endeavoured  to  describe  what  I  saw. 

For  such  references  to  the  liistory,  customs, 
and  religion  of  native  tribes  as  are  beyond  the 
range  of  personal  observation,  I  am  indebted, 
among  other  sources,  to  valuable  papers  in  the 
Transactions  of  the  China  Branch  of  the  Royal 
Asiatic  Society. 

CHARLES    WENYON. 

London,  1909. 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTER   I 

OFF  THE   SIBERIAN   COAST 

PAGB 

Crowded  deck — Navvies  for  Siberian  Railway- 
Chinese  gamblers — Fight  for  food  .         .         .         .11 

CHAPTER    II 
THE   EASTERN  TERMINUS 

Harbour  and  town  of  Vladivostock — Mixed  population 
— German  merchants — A  Siberian  Sebastopol — 
Argus-eyed  police ,17 

CHAPTER   III 

THE   GREAT  POST-ROAD 

An  inunense  covintry — Diversified  configviration^ 
Track  of  early  settlers — The  Great  Plateau — 
Alpine  ranges — Rigorous  climate — Sparse  popula- 
tion— Modes  of  travel — Post-horse  system     .         .       24 

CHAPTER    IV 

THE   START 

A  traveller's  narrative — Presentiments — A  wintry  day 
— Turning     back — A     royal     traveller — Appalling 
distances  —  Poor     accommodation  —  Monotony  — 
Tlie  sort  of  people  to  enjoy  it       .         .         .         .31 
7 


8  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER   V 
FROM  THE  COAST  TO  LAKE  KHANKA,  BY  TARANTASS 

PAGE 

First  post-station  —  Attempted  extortion  —  Lonely 
country — A  Siberian  graveyard — Heating  appar- 
atus— A  night  in  the  travellers'  room — Noisy 
company — Description  of  a  tarantass — Russian 
horses — Use  of  pillows — Corduroy  bridges  and 
roads — Fast   driving — Stuck  in   a  bog.         .         .       38 

CHAPTER    VI 
LIFE   IN   A   SIBERIAN  VILLAGE 

A  post-road  of  ice — Crossing  Khanka  in  a  sledge — 
Waiting  for  a  thaw — Kamenrubeloff — A  Russian 
land-surveyor — Our  lodgings — A  small  dinner- 
party— Washing — Siberian  peasants — Extension  of 
Russian  territory — Cossacks — Gipsies — !BIusic — The 
chiirch  and  its  services — Sacrament  of  Lord's 
Supper — St.  George's  day — Contentment  of  vil- 
lagers— A  wedding — Clouds  in  the  sky  ...       59 

CHAPTER   VII 

BY   STEAMER   FROM  KHANKA   TO   THE   AMOOR 

Crossing  Khanka  Lake — Sungacha  River — Wild  ducks 
— Fellow  passengers — Tea  and  vodka — '  Siberian 
wives  ' — A  drunken  engineer — Usuri  River — Fish- 
skin  Tartars —  Yukola — Shamanism — Sable-hunting 
— Khabarofka — Russia  and  Cathay — Cathedral — 
Martial  music 84 

CHAPTER   VIII 
UP  THE   AMOOR 

Confluence  with  the  L^suri — A  set  of  gamblers — 
Baccarat — Flowery    hillsides — Salmon — Anglers — 


CONTENTS  9 

PAGE 

Blagovestchensk — Gold-mining  on  Zeya  River — 
Russian  defence  of  frontier — Apathy  of  China — 
Sociability  of  Russian  people — Military  officers 
■ — Jews — Deck  passengers — Priests,  emigrants,  and 
soldiers — Wood-stations — Purchase  of  provisions — 
Wild  scenery — Night  on  the  river — Forest  fires — 
Men  overboard — Shilka  and  Argun  rivers — 
Stretensk 109 

CHAPTER    IX 
FROM   STRETENSK   TO   LAKE   BAIKAL,    BY   TARANTASS 

Crossing  the  Shilka — A  telyega  ride — In  the  MTong 
house — Nertchinsk  and  Kara — The  higher  terrace 
of  the  plateaii — Cold  nights — Tchita — Raft-build- 
ing— Dry  climate — Exiled  Socialists — An  English 
resident — At  a  picnic — Prince  Datpak — The  Tun- 
gus — On  the  Buriat  steppe — Trinity  Sunday — ■ 
Drunkenness  and  worship — The  Buriats — Popoo- 
tchiks  —  Verchni-Udinsk  —  Russian  lovers  —  Sign- 
boards —  Raskolniks  —  Summer  flowers  —  Selenga 
River  —  Trout-streams  —  Approaching  Baikal  — 
The  lake — Its  size  and  loneliness — The  post- 
station  on  the  shore — An  unamiable  wife — An 
overcrowded  lodging-house — Fish  and  flowers        .     136 

CHAPTER   X 

THROUGH   IRKUTSK    TO    TOMSK,    BY   TARANTASS 

Distant  view  of  Irkutsk — Its  wealth  and  public 
institutions — The  taiga — Not  so  deserted  as  it 
seem.s — Bears  and  wolves — Alone  in  the  forest — 
Caravans — Exiles  going  east :  criminal,  political, 
and  religious — Penalties  of  dissent — Strange  sects 
— Treatment  of  exiles  on  the  road — Irregularities 
— Convict  stations — Attempts  to  escape — Bradyaga 
— Diseases  of  Siberia — Cholera — Hiring  outside 
horses — Out     in     a     thunderstorm — Crossing    the 


10  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Yenisei  —  Krasnoiarsk  —  Atchinsk  —  Cheap  horses 
and  pro\'isions — Tartars — Samoyedes — The  last 
stage  on  the  post-road 181 

CHAPTER   XI 

FROM  TOMSK  TO  THE  URAL  MOUNTAINS,  BY  RIVER 
AND    RAILWAY 

The  city  and  government  of  Tomsk — On  the  Obi — 
Rafts — A  camp  of  Ostiaks — Russian  methods  of 
evangehsm — Long  days — The  Irtish  River — The 
Tobol  and  the  city  of  Tobolsk — Fertile  plains — 
The  great  northern  swamps — Mammoth  remains — 
Religious  refugees — Russian  undergraduates — Con- 
fluences of  Siberian  Rivers — The  Toora  River  and 
city  of  Tiumen — On  the  railway — Ural  Mountains 
scenery — Ekaterinburg — '  Evu-ope  '  and  '  Asia  '      .     221 

CHAPTER    XII 
CROSSING   THE   RUSSIAN   FRONTIER 

Suspicious  of  strangers — Heterogeneous  population — 
Difficulty  of  government — Detectives  at  frontier 
station — Detained  on  suspicion — The  village  of 
Wirballen — The  frontier  line — Russian  and  German 
sentinels — Out   of   the   cage   at   last      .         .         .     247 


FOUR  THOUSAND  MILES 
ACROSS   SIBERIA 

CHAPTER    I 

OFF  THE   SIBERIAN   COAST 

*  We  are  nearing  Vladivostock,'  said  the  captain, 
and  the  only  European  passenger  was  very  glad 
to  hear  it. 

To  think  of  reaching  port  always  gives  a  thrill 
of  pleasure  even  on  the  happiest  voyage,  and  it 
naturally  gave  a  deeper  thrill  to  one  who  had 
endured  the  misery  of  a  voyage  such  as  this. 
In  some  respects  it  could  not  have  been  more 
favourable — calm  sea  and  cloudless  sky,  a  well- 
found  ship,  obliging  officers,  and  a  quick  run  of 
twelve  days  from  the  China  coast,  including  a 
stay  of  thirty  hours  at  Nagasaki ;  but  the  crowd 
of  passengers  we  had  on  board  spoiled  every- 
thing. 

Those  who  have  travelled  by  excursion 
steamers  on  the  Enghsh  coast  perhaps  know 
something  about  crowded  decks  ;  but  between 
living  in  a  crowd  for  a  few  hours  and  living  in 

11 


12  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

one  for  tmce  as  many  days,  there  is  a  vast  differ- 
ence ;  and  there  is  a  still  vaster  difference  be- 
tween a  crowd  of  English  lads  and  lasses  and 
such  a  crowd  as  ours. 

It  all  came  about  through  the  restless  enter- 
prise of  the  Russian  Government,  which,  not 
content  with  its  great  high  road  through  Siberia, 
must  now  seek  to  supersede  it  by  a  railway.  The 
eastern  section — a  stretch  of  about  two  hundred 
miles,  from  the  coast  to  the  Usuri  River — had 
already  been  commenced  ;  but,  all  the  European 
labour  available  not  being  sufficient  for  the 
work,  the  officials  had  at  last  decided  to  import 
ten  thousand  Chinese  coolies  to  complete  it. 

The  first  gang  of  eleven  hundred  were  shipped 
by  the  steamer  on  which  I  had  the  misfortune 
to  be  a  passenger.  She  was  not  a  large  vessel, 
and  with  five  hundred  persons  on  board  would 
have  been  uncomfortably  crowded ;  having 
more  than  twice  that  number,  the  decks  were 
literally  covered  with  them,  and  outside  the 
cabin  there  was  hardly  room  to  move. 

The  crush  was  no  inconvenience  to  the  China- 
men ;  they  rather  seemed  to  hke  it,  and  required 
no  urging  to  squeeze  themselves  into  tighter 
compass  that  they  might  make  room  for  the 
little  gambhng-tables,  on  which  dice,  dominoes, 
and  fantan  helped  to  keep  their  little  stock  of 
cash  in  circulation. 


OFF   THE    SIBERIAN    COAST  13 

There   was  room   enough  to   gamble,    but  not 
room  enough  for  the  inevitable  gambling  fight — 
if  '  fight '  it  may  be  called  ;   for  when  an  alterca- 
tion   arises    among    Chinese    gamesters,    though 
there  is  always  a  good  deal  of  violent  gesticula- 
tion and  a  good  deal  of  noise,  it  is  seldom  that 
any  injury  is  done  except  to  the  vocal  chords  of 
the  disputants.     But  such  innocent  termination 
of  a  Chinese  quarrel  implies  plenty  of  room  for 
the  free  play  of   the  muscles,  and  this,  unfortu- 
nately, could  not   be   obtained   on   our  crowded 
deck.     When  the  aggrieved  gambler,  in  Chinese 
fashion,  raised  his  fist  over  his  shoulder  to  give 
emphasis  to  some  awful  imprecation,   of  neces- 
sity he  thrust  his  elbow  against  the  nose  or  into 
the  eye  of  some  innocent  observer  in  his  rear. 
As  the  man  thus  unexpectedly  assaulted  raised 
his  fist  in  the  same  way,  he  inflicted  like  injury 
upon  some  one  in  the  crowd  behind  him.     Thus 
every  blow  threatened  or  inflicted  brought  a  new 
combatant  into  the  fray,  until  what  was  at  first 
a  simple  dispute  between  a  couple  of  gamblers 
became  a  general  fight.     The  consequences  might 
have  been  disastrous,  but  at  this  stage  the  chief 
officer  adroitly  turned  the  water-hose  upon  the 
battlefield,  and,  if  the  courage  of  the  combatants 
had  been   a  candle-flame,  the  cold  water  could 
not   have   more   quickly   and   completely   extin- 
guished it.     In  a  few  minutes  the  gambling-tables 


14  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

were  set  up  again,  and  the  yellow  sea  of  living 
beings  between  the  bulwarks  of  our  vessel  was, 
like  the  blue  sea  outside,  as  peaceful  as  if  it  had 
never  been  ruffled  by  a  storm. 

But  what  excitement  there  was  at  feeding- 
time  !  Twice  a  day  the  Chinese  cooks  boiled 
for  their  fellow  countrymen  three  hundred-weight 
of  rice.  It  was  distributed  in  wooden  buckets 
— one  bucket  for  ten  men  ;  and,  if  anything  like 
order  had  been  observed  by  the  distributors  or 
the  recipients,  there  would  have  been  abundance 
of  food  for  all.  But  Chinese  stewards  would  no 
more  think  of  enforcing  discipline  than  would 
Chinese  coolies  of  submitting  to  it ;  and  so,  as 
soon  as  the  rice  was  ready,  there  was  a  wild  rush 
upon  the  galley.  Over  every  bucket  there  was 
a  tug  of  war,  dozens  of  pairs  of  hands  struggling 
for  possession  of  it.  In  the  tussle  many  a  bucket 
was  upset,  and  its  contents  trampled  under  foot ; 
and  so  the  supply  of  rice  was  exhausted  long 
before  all  had  received  their  share,  some  of  the 
coolies  having  to  endure  an  absolutely  unbroken 
fast  for  several  days. 

Naturally,  the  struggle  became  fiercer  as  time 
went  on.  Standing  with  the  captain  on  the 
bridge  one  morning,  and  looking  down  upon  that 
fight  for  food,  it  was  hard  to  believe  that  those 
engaged  in  it  were  human  beings.  All  were 
stripped  to  the  waist,  and,  with  a  babel  of  con- 


OFF    THE    SIBERIAN   COAST  15 

fused  shouting,  they  wrestled  and  fought  with 
one  another  hke  beasts  of  prey. 

One  sinewy,  Httle  man,  with  eager,  hungry 
look,  was  struggling  vainly  in  the  background. 
He  had  not  had  a  morsel  of  food  for  a  couple  of 
days,  and  it  seemed  impossible  that  he  should 
get  any  now  ;  but  suddenly  a  thought  struck 
him,  and,  springing  on  to  the  bulwarks  of  the 
steamer,  he  threw  himself — not  into  the  water, 
but  into  the  seething  mass  of  heads  and  shoulders 
between  him  and  the  cook-house.  He  HteraUy 
swam  through  them  to  the  front,  and  went  down 
head  first  among  the  rice  buckets.  The  first  one 
he  touched  he  seized,  and,  putting  his  head  inside 
it,  began  to  eat  like  a  dog.  The  crowd  tried  to 
pull  the  bucket  away  from  him,  but,  with  one 
hand  on  either  side,  he  gripped  it  Hke  a  vice.  He 
was  pinched  and  pommelled,  but  he  would  not 
let  go  his  hold.  Even  when  his  feet  were  lifted 
from  the  ground — and  men,  on  the  top  of  the 
galley,  seizing  them  began  to  haul  the  gormand 
up — for  a  space  the  bucket  went  up  with  him, 
and,  though  his  face  was  hidden,  I  could  see,  by 
the  working  of  the  muscles  of  his  neck,  that  he 
was  still  bolting  great  gulps  of  rice  as  fast  as 
he  could  swallow. 

The  bucket  was  torn  from  the  man's  grasp  at 
length,  and  he  was  flung  into  the  rear.  But  he 
seemed  little  the  worse  for  the  conflict.     He  had 


16  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

received  a  drubbing,  but  had  been  compensated 
for  it  by  a  hearty  meal ;  and,  as  he  rubbed  his  Mps 
with  the  back  of  his  hand,  his  eyes  twinkled,  and 
his  face  beamed  with  the  famihar  Mongolian 
smile — '  a  smile  that  was  pensive  and  bland.' 

But  twelve  days  of  this  kind  of  diversion  was 
enough,  and  hence  the  joy  wdth  which  I  heard 
the  captain  say,  on  that  raw  April  morning,  that 
Vladivostock  was  in  sight. 


CHAPTER    II 

THE    EASTERN    TERjVnNTJS 

There  is  something  forbidding  in  the  aspect  of 
the  wild  mountain  ranges  which  rise  sheer  up 
from  the  sea  to  the  height  of  3,000  feet  or  more 
along  the  eastern  coast  of  Siberia  ;  but  near  the 
Manchurian  frontier,  where  the  Suifoon  River 
finds  its  way  into  the  sea,  there  is  a  break  in  the 
range,  and  the  mountains  on  either  side  fall  away 
into  a  group  of  gently  sloping,  round-topped 
hills.  Over  the  lower  slopes  of  these  hills,  in  the 
summer-time  green  with  grass  and  foliage,  and  over 
the  narrow  space  between  them  and  the  shore, 
is  spread  the  town  of  Vladivostock,  the  eastern 
terminus  of  the  longest  post-road  in  the  world, 
and  of  the  prospective  Trans-Siberian  railway. 

This  town  has  sprung  into  existence  within  the 
last  thirty  years,  but  it  is  already  a  well-estab- 
lished settlement,  with  a  population  of  twenty 
thousand,  half  of  whom  are  Europeans.  It  has 
not  yet  attracted  much  attention  in  Western 
Europe,  but  is  regarded  by  Russia  as  of  great 

17  2 


18  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

strategic  importance,  and  is  likely  to  become,  if 
it  is  not  already,  the  most  powerful  military  post 
in  the  Far  East. 

Opposite  the  town  lies  an  island  several  miles 
in  length,  and  the  strait  included  between  it  and 
the  mainland  forms  the  harbour — an  unusually 
fine  one,  deep  enough  to  admit  the  biggest  ship 
afloat,  capacious  enough  to  accommodate  the 
largest  fleet,  and  in  all  weathers  affording  safe 
anchorage. 

The  general  appearance  of  Vladivostock  is 
very  different  from  that  of  any  other  settlement 
in  this  part  of  the  world.  It  seems  at  first  more 
European,  for  one  is  struck  at  once  by  the  pro- 
minence of  certain  red-brick  buildings — barracks, 
I  was  told  they  were,  but  in  size  and  obtrusive 
ugliness  they  reminded  one  of  some  newly  built 
cotton-mill  in  Lancashire.  A  few  of  the  business 
houses  and  residences  are  also  built  of  red  brick-; 
but  buildings  of  this  kind  are  rare,  and  appear 
as  blots  upon  the  prevailing  whiteness  of  the 
cosy  wooden  dwellings  which  compose  by  far  the 
greater  part  of  the  town.  Most  of  the  houses 
are  detached,  and,  except  in  the  business  quarter, 
stand  in  gardens.  In  these  gardens  there  are 
plenty  of  trees — oak,  lime,  maple,  walnut,  and 
such  fruit-trees  as  the  apple,  pear,  and  cherry. 
When  these  are  in  full  leaf  and  blossom,  Vladi- 
vostock, looking  down  upon  the  sea  from  the 


THE    EASTERN   TERMINUS  19 

verdure-covered  hillside,  is  no  doubt  quite  as 
beautiful  as  people  say  ;  but  it  seemed  dreary 
enough  when  I  saw  it  at  the  end  of  winter,  for 
the  keen  frosts  had  destroyed  the  foliage  and 
withered  up  the  grass,  and  there  was  nothing  to 
be  seen  but  houses  and  leafless  trees. 

For  nearly  six  months  every  year  the  harbour 
itself  is  frozen,  and  our  steamer  was  one  of  the 
first  that  season  to  effect  an  entrance.  The  few 
steamers  that  had  got  in  before  us  had  the  paint 
scraped  from  their  sides  by  the  pack  through 
which  they  had  forced  their  way  ;  and  when  we 
ourselves  arrived,  the  sea  to  the  northward  of 
the  harbour  was  one  mass  of  broken  ice  as  far  as 
the  eye  could  see. 

Though  in  some  respects  a  characteristically 
Russian  town,  Vladivostock  is  very  cosmopolitan 
in  its  inhabitants.  The  boatmen  who  took  me 
ashore,  and  the  porters  who  carried  my  luggage 
to  the  hotel,  were,  like  most  of  the  day-labourers 
of  the  town,  Koreans.  Many  of  the  smaller  shops 
are  kept  by  Chinamen — from  Canton,  of  course, 
the  most  distant  but  most  enterprising  portion  of 
the  Empire  ;  and  very  delighted  these  Cantonese 
were  to  meet  with  a  white-faced  European  who 
could  converse  in  their  own  patois.  Other  shops 
are  kept  by  Japanese,  but  these  are  few. 

The  principal  merchants  here  are  Germans. 
In  the  early  days  of  the  port  two  German  sailors 


20  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

ran  away  from  their  ship  here,  and  opened  a  little 
store.  That  store  has  developed  into  the  leading 
mercantile  and  banking  firm  in  Eastern  Siberia  ; 
it  employs  in  its  house  here  upwards  of  fifty 
European  clerks,  and  has  branches  in  many  of 
the  interior  towns.  There  is  not  a  single  British 
merchant  at  this  port,  and  never  will  be  if  the 
German  settlers  can  have  their  way  ;  they  are 
angry  at  the  very  thought  of  British  competition, 
and  are  determined  to  keep  the  field  they  have 
exploited  to  themselves. 

Russians  are,  of  course,  more  numerous  than 
other  European  residents,  but,  except  the  drosky 
drivers  and  a  few  merchants  and  hotel-keepers, 
almost  all  are  in  Government  employ.  The  mili- 
tary element  predominates.  The  finest  plot  of 
land  in  the  neighbourhood  is  the  parade  ground  ; 
the  biggest  buildings  are  the  barracks  ;  men  in 
uniform  are  met  with  at  every  turn  ;  and  the 
bray  of  trumpets  and  the  roll  of  drums  are  sounds 
too  familiar  to  be  noticed.  The  town  has  also  a 
well-equipped  arsenal,  a  capacious  floating  dry- 
dock,  and  a  fleet  of  torpedo-boats ;  men-of-war 
are  lying  at  anchor  in  the  harbour  ;  the  heights 
above  the  town,  though  looking  innocent  enough, 
are  all  supposed  to  have  their  masked  batteries  ; 
and  it  seems  to  be  the  ambition  of  the  Czar  to 
make  this  port  a  sort  of  Siberian  Sebastopol. 

The   ice-bound    winter,  which  was    just   over 


THE    EASTERN   TERMINUS  21 

when  I  arrived,  must  have  been  a  lonely  time  for 
the  European  population — cut  off  from  all  the 
world  by  the  frozen  sea  in  front  of  them,  and  the 
5  000  miles  of  snow  behind.  But  the  winter  here 
is  far  from  an  unmixed  evil,  and  to  the  military 
authorities  and  the  police  it  is  a  veritable  boon. 
In  the  summer  they  must  be  always  on  the  war- 
path. Regarding  every  stranger  as  a  spy  or  a 
rebel,  or  a  villain  of  some  sort,  unless  he  can 
prove  that  he  is  not,  their  suspicions  keep  them 
continually  on  the  alert.  If  no  stranger  is  in 
sight,  a  sharp  lookout  must  be  maintained  for 
those  who  may  be  coming,  and,  as  if  all  the  world 
had  its  eye  upon  Vladivostock,  its  brave  defenders 
stand  with  finger  on  trigger  ready  for  the  fray. 

Such  vigilance  must  be  very  exhausting,  and, 
after  the  nervous  strain  of  five  or  six  months  of 
it,  the  relaxation  brought  by  winter  must  be  an 
unspeakable  relief.  No  hostile  fleet  can  break 
through  those  barriers  of  ice,  and  no  hostile  army 
can  reach  them  through  that  wilderness  of  snow. 
Even  the  merchant,  however  reluctantly,  must 
take  a  holiday,  as  free  from  all  shipping  worries 
as  if  he  lived  in  an  inland  town.  But  the 
whole  community  responds  to  the  reaction,  and 
the  winter  season  is  an  unbroken  succession  of 
festivities. 

At  the  time  of  my  landing  there,  Vladivostock 
was  just  waking  up  again  to  a  sense  of  its  re- 


22  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

sponsibilities.  The  ice  has  broken  up,  and  who 
knows  what  may  happen  ?  The  merchant  is  on 
the  lookout  for  a  fresh  cargo  of  provisions  from 
Odessa.  The  fighting  men  must  again  mount 
guard  against  the  enemy.  The  police  are  par- 
ticularly busy,  for  steamers  are  coming  in  from 
Japan,  and  Korea,  and  China  ;  and  aliens  are 
appearing  in  the  streets,  whose  passports  must 
be  examined,  and  whose  movements  must  be 
watched,  lest,  prowling  about  the  town,  they 
should  get  to  know  something  of  the  nature  and 
position  of  its  defences. 

A  fellow  countryman,  who  had  come  up  from 
one  of  the  China  treaty  ports  for  a  holiday,  was 
walking,  on  the  day  of  his  arrival,  along  the  main 
street  of  the  town,  and,  because  he  had  a  photo- 
graphic camera  in  his  possession,  the  police  at 
once  arrested  him,  marched  him  back  to  the 
steamer  which  brought  him,  and  told  him  that 
if  he  set  foot  on  shore  again  he  would  be  provided 
with  accommodation  which  would  limit  his  move- 
ments more  effectively.  The  example  of  this 
unfortunate  photographer  was  a  warning  to  me, 
and  I  did  my  very  best  to  escape  his  fate.  I 
tried  to  appear  uninterested,  to  be  content  with 
furtive  glances  at  the  things  about  me,  to  have  a 
vacant,  expressionless  countenance,  and,  as  far 
as  possible,  to  look  like  innocence  itself. 


THE    EASTERN   TERMINUS  23 

But  all  this  circumspectness  did  not  save  me 
from  suspicion  ;  and  when  the  superintendent 
of  police  came  to  see  my  passport,  he  said,  in  a 
most  searching  tone,  '  On  your  v/ay  from  Canton 
to  London  ?    then  what  brings  you  here  ?  ' 

'  You  have  no  commission  from  the  British 
Government  ?  ' 

'  And  are  not  sent  out  by  any  English  news- 
paper ?  ' 

'  Have  no  other  motive  than  a  desire  to  see 
the  country  ?  ' 

Then  he  ceased  questioning,  and  sank  into  a 
profound  reverie.  I  could  see  plainly  that  he 
was  trying  to  determine  between  the  two  alter- 
natives :  was  the  individual  before  him  a  liar 
or  a  fool  ? 


CHAPTER    III 

THE    GREAT   POST-ROAD 

Following  one  of  the  main  streets  of  Vladivo- 
stock  to  the  top  of  the  low  range  of  hills  it  crosses 
on  the  outskirts  of  the  town,  the  street  is  seen 
to  be  continuous  with  a  road  which  stretches  on 
before  us,  until  it  becomes  in  the  distance  a  mere 
brown  streak  upon  the  hillside,  and  then  is  lost 
in  the  forest.  That  brown  streak,  running 
like  a  thread  right  through  the  country  and 
over  the  Ural  Mountains  into  Europe,  is  the 
great  post-road  which,  mainly  for  military  pur- 
poses, the  Russian  Government  has  constructed 
across  Siberia. 

It  is  a  wonderful  achievement.  Even  the 
Romans,  renowned  road-makers  as  they  were, 
never  attempted  a  task  of  the  kind  so  formid- 
able. Rough  enough  in  many  places,  and  in 
others  little  more  than  a  beaten  track  across 
the  steppe  ;  but  it  is  a  marvel  to  find  any  prac- 
ticable way  at  all  across  a  country  not  only  so 
unsettled,  but  so  immense. 

24 


THE    GREAT    POST-ROAD  25 

'  If  *'  Britannia  rules  the  waves,"  '  once  said 
a  Russian  officer  to  me,  '  remember  that  Russia 
rules  the  land  '  ;  and  when  I  stood  shivering 
on  the  shore  at  Vladivostock,  and  thought  of 
the  vast  expanse  of  country  between  me  and 
Europe,  I  felt  as  I  had  never  done  before  the 
force  of  that  remark.  Extending  westward 
from  the  Pacific  Ocean  to  the  Ural  Mountains, 
and  northward  from  the  Chinese  frontier  to  the 
Polar  seas,  Siberia  covers  an  area  of  six  millions 
of  square  miles,  is  at  least  a  hundred  times  as 
large  as  England,  and  forms  with  European 
Russia  the  widest  contmuous  stretch  of  empire 
in  the  world. 

And  the  country  is  as  wild  as  it  is  extensive. 
The  uniformity  of  configuration  which  popular 
opinion  attributes  to  Siberia  is  true  only  of  the 
extreme  north,  where,  along  the  shores  of  the 
Arctic  Ocean  for  a  distance  of  4,000  miles,  and 
inland  for  a  distance  of  from  150  to  400,  lies  a 
dreary  waste  of  treeless  and  swampy  lowland, 
known  to  Russians  as  the  Tundra,  and  which 
is  one  immense  unbroken  plain.  The  general 
misconception  of  Siberia  may  have  arisen  from 
the  fact  that  the  earlier  Russian  settlers  in  this 
region  made  their  way  eastward  across  this 
plain.  They  did  so  to  avoid  the  forests  and  the 
mountains  which  made  the  southern  route  so 
difficult,  and,  still  more,  to  escape  the  numerous 


26  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

tribes   of  aborigines,   who   savagely  resisted  in- 
trusion into  tlieir  domains. 

But  this  course  across  the  swamp  was  practic- 
able only  in  the  winter  :  it  was  impossible  to 
establish  settlements  along  the  way,  and  the 
part  of  the  Pacific  coast  to  which  it  led  was  far 
away  from  those  districts  of  Eastern  Siberia 
most  suitable  for  agriculture  and  for  pasturage. 
So  at  length  this  northern  route  to  the  Pacific 
was  abandoned  for  one  farther  south.  Ad- 
venturous freebooting  Cossacks  attended  to  the 
aborigines,  and  the  engineers  set  themselves 
to  make  the  road. 

They  had  no  easy  task,  especially  in  the 
eastern  half  of  the  country,  which  is  crossed 
near  its  centre  by  the  Great  Plateau — that 
immense  swelling  of  the  earth's  surface  which, 
from  the  foothills  of  the  Himalayas,  extends 
in  a  north-easterly  direction  through  Central 
and  Northern  Asia  to  the  Behring  Straits.  This 
vast  table-land  tapers  towards  the  north  ;  but 
in  Southern  Siberia,  where  the  post-road  crosses, 
it  is  nearly  1,000  miles  in  breadth,  and  attains 
an  elevation  of  3,500  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
sea.  It  is  buttressed  on  either  side  by  mountains 
which  rise  to  a  higher  level  than  itself,  forming 
a  sort  of  Cyclopean  battlement,  and  making  the 
plain  in  this  direction  inaccessible  but  for  the 
fact  that,  like  all  other  battlements,  it  has  its 


THE    GREAT   POST-ROAD  27 

notches — great  gaps  in  the  mountain  wall 
through  which  the  ancient  glaciers  passed  to 
score  a  winding  passage  for  themselves  down 
to  the  sea  below.  Through  one  of  these  great 
natural  furrows,  a  long  circuitous  valley  between 
ranges  of  rugged  hills,  the  post-road  finds  its 
way  on  to  the  table-land. 

'  But  this  eastern  plateau  of  Siberia  is  by  no 
means  a  continuous  plain,  for  ridges  of  low  hills, 
following  generally  a  north-easterly  direction, 
break  through  it  here  and  there,  and  from  its 
centre  rises  a  second  loftier  table-land,  also 
walled  on  either  side  by  mountains,  some  of 
whose  peaks  attain  the  height  of  8,500  feet. 

East  and  west  of  the  Great  Plateau  the  road 
passes  through  alpine  ranges  covering  an  exten- 
sive area.  Filling  many  of  the  valleys  of  these 
regions,  and  spreading  far  over  the  table-lands, 
are  immense  forests  of  birch,  and  larch,  and  cedar, 
through  which,  step  by  step,  the  makers  of  the 
road  have  had  to  cleave  their  way. 

Outside  these  chains  of  mountains  are  other 
heights  and  other  table-lands,  including  the 
western  steppes,  which,  with  occasional  breaks 
for  the  passage  of  great  rivers,  extend  as  far  as 
the  Ural  Mountains. 

The  construction  of  such  a  length  of  road  was 
made  more  difficult  and  dangerous  by  the  rigour 
of  the  climate.     The  name  Siberia  has  become 


28  ACROSS   SIBERIA 

almost  synonymous  with  wintry  cold  and  desola- 
tion, and  in  this  respect  the  popular  opinion  is 
correct.  Though  it  has  in  most  parts  a  warm, 
bright  summer,  beautiful  with  flowers,  and 
musical  with  birds  and  insects,  its  winters  are 
long  and  extremely  cold.  There  is  not  a  river  or 
lake  in  Siberia,  nor  a  harbour  on  its  shores,  which 
is  not  frozen  for  about  six  months  in  the  year. 
In  the  northern  districts  the  frost  never  dis- 
appears, for  the  thaw  of  the  short  summer  only 
affects  a  shallow  surface  of  the  soil ;  and  in 
some  of  the  largest  settlements  on  the  Lena  the 
people  use  ice  instead  of  glass  for  their  window- 
panes. 

If  there  had  been  a  considerable  European 
population  the  climatic  difficulties  would  not 
have  been  so  serious  ;  but  the  road  was  carried 
through  extensive  tracts  of  country  which,  but 
for  a  few  nomadic  Tartars,  were  absolutely 
uninhabited,  and  the  workmen  had  to  depend 
upon  themselves  for  shelter  and  supplies.  The 
number  of  settlers  in  the  country  has  greatly 
increased  since  the  road  was  made,  but  even  now 
the  total  population  of  Siberia  is  not  equal  to 
that  of  London. 

Such,  then,  is  the  region  crossed  by  the  great 
post-road — an  immense  expanse  of  thinly-popu- 
lated country,  in  some  parts  sinking  into  swamps, 
in  others  rising  into  lofty  mountain  ranges,  and 


THE    GREAT   POST-ROAD  29 

then  again  spreading  itself  out  in  almost  inter- 
minable plains  ; — stretches  of  gloomy  forest, 
and  then  of  treeless  waste,  with  great  lakes,  wild 
torrents,  and  here  and  there  some  mighty  river 
rolling  northward  to  the  Polar  seas. 

In  a  few  years  more,  as  the  swarm  of  Chinese 
navvies  on  the  steamer  told  me,  trains  will  be 
running  through  Siberia.  But,  at  the  time  now 
referred  to,  the  short  line  which  runs  across 
the  Ural  Mountains  into  Europe  was  the  only 
railway  in  the  country.  Steamers  were  plying 
on  some  of  the  Siberian  rivers,  and  at  certain 
seasons  a  considerable  part  of  the  journey  across 
the  country  can  be  accomplished  in  this  way  ; 
but  from  the  coast  to  the  first  navigable  river, 
and  between  one  navigable  river  and  another, 
lay  an  extensive  tract  of  country,  which  could 
only  be  traversed  on  the  post-road,  and  where 
one's  only  choice  was  whether  he  would  walk  or 
ride. 

Soldiers,  poor  emigrants,  and  non-political 
exiles  have  to  walk,  and  they  spend  from  six  to 
nine  months  upon  the  way.  Travellers  who  can 
afford  to  pay  for  them  use  horses  and  a  kind  of 
rough  phaeton — a  springless,  four-wheeled  car- 
riage, half  covered  by  a  hood,  and  called  by  the 
Russians  a  tarantass. 

Except  in  a  few  settled  districts,  we  depend 
for  our  supply  of  these  conveyances  upon  the 


30  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

Russian  Government,  which,  for  military  pur- 
poses, has  placed  a  cordon  of  post-horse  stations, 
from  sixteen  to  twenty  miles  apart,  on  all  the 
Siberian  roads.  A  few  yemschiks — as  the  post- 
horse  stablemen  are  called — and  in  most  cases 
their  wives  with  them,  are  put  in  charge  of 
the  station,  which  is  often  situated  in  such  a 
lonely  region  that  these  yemschik-households 
are  the  sole  inhabitants.  At  these  stations 
officials  travelling  on  urgent  business  expect  to 
find  vehicles  and  teams  of  horses  ready  for  them 
on  the  shortest  notice,  and  the  communica- 
tions between  one  military  post  and  another  are 
thus  maintained  in  great  efficiency. 

Civilians  who  wish  to  travel  in  this  way  must 
apply  at  one  of  the  Government  centres  for  a 
podorojtia — a  written  certificate  of  permission 
to  use  any  such  vehicles  and  horses  which  are 
at  liberty,  hiring  them  from  one  post  to  the 
next  at  a  certain  charge  per  mile.  The  amount 
is  fixed  by  Government,  and  a  printed  table  of 
the  charges  is  posted  up  on  the  walls  of  the 
travellers'  room  at  every  station. 

In  Vladivostock  I  obtained  a  podorojna,  and, 
except  when  steamers  were  available,  travelled 
on  the  post-road  with  horses  and  tarantass. 


CHAPTER    IV 

THE    START 

The  worst  thing  about  a  cold  bath  in  winter 
is  the  first  plunge,  and  in  a  journey  across  Siberia 
there  is  nothing  more  trying  than  the  contem- 
plation of  the  start. 

It  is  better  to  commence  such  a  journey  on 
the  western  side,  for  in  this  way  we  reach  the 
wilds  by  imperceptible  degrees,  and,  what  is  a 
still  greater  advantage,  we  can  start  without 
attracting  the  attention  of  our  neighbours. 
The  European  population  of  the  Far  East  is 
small  ;  everybody  knows  everybody  and  every- 
body's movements  ;  and  as  Siberia  is  generally 
regarded  as  a  dreadful  country,  the  man  who 
thinks  of  crossing  it  may  expect  to  receive  such 
comments  from  his  compatriots  as  will  not  be 
conducive  to  his  equipment  for  the  journey. 

A  European  resident  in  China,  who  attempted 
to  cross  Siberia  a  few  years  ago,  has  thus  de- 
scribed, with  not  less  truth  than  simplicity, 
some  of  his  initial  experiences. 

31 


32  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

'  I  knew  that  a  journey  across  Siberia,  with- 
out a  companion,  and  with  barely  sufficient 
funds  to  secure  native  means  of  travel  and 
accommodation,  was  not  a  task  to  be  lightly 
undertaken  ;  but  if  I  had  been  rash  enough  to 
start  without  sufficient  consideration,  I  met 
with  so  many  Job's  comforters  between  Hong 
Kong  and  Vladivostock  that  I  could  not  fail, 
before  I  got  there,  to  be  fairly  well  acquainted 
with  the  risks  and  hardships  of  the  journey. 

'  "  Good-bj^e,"  said  one  of  my  friends,  "  I 
never  expect  to  hear  of  you  again." 

'  One  told  me  that  I  should  catch  my  death 
of  cold  ;  another  that  I  should  be  arrested  as  a 
spy,  and  perish  miserably  in  a  Siberian  prison. 

'  Some  said  it  was  most  likely  that  I  should 
get  lost,  and  die  of  starvation  in  the  depths  of 
the  forest ;  others  feared  that  I  should  be 
drowned  in  crossing  some  of  the  great  rivers  ; 
or  that  I  should  fall  over  a  precipice  ;  or  be 
devoured  by  wolves  ;  or  kicked  to  death  by 
wild  horses  ;  or  murdered  by  escaped  exiles,  or 
some  of  the  wild  tribes  of  the  country.' 

Gloomy  as  were  these  premonitions,  the 
traveller  declared  that  they  would  not  have 
affected  him  at  all  '  had  they  not  taken  a  mean 
advantage — as  such  evil  omens  will — of  an 
hour  of  physical  depression  due  to  an  attack 
of  aonie.' 


THE    START  33 

This  reference  to  an  ague  fit  is  suspicious. 
Fevers  of  this  kind  are  rare  in  Vladivostock  ; 
and  were  it  not  for  the  writer's  definite  assurance 
to  the  contrary,  the  word  in  this  connexion 
could  only  be  read  as  a  synonym  for  funk. 

The  narrative  proceeds  :  '  That  fit  of  ague,  a 
parting  buffet  from  the  malarious  climate  I  had 
left,  happened  to  strike  me  on  a  typical  Siberian 
winter's  day — a  day  dismal  enough  to  make 
the  blithest  spirit  pessimistic.  A  cold,  raw, 
searching  wind  was  blowing  ;  banks  of  fog  were 
drifting  before  it ;  the  sky  was  overcast  ;  and 
before  me  in  the  bay  were  fields  of  ice.  Chilled 
to  the  very  bones,  and  unable  to  get  warm  any 
other  way,  I  went  to  bed.  Then  it  was  that 
those  miserable  forebodings,  which  hitherto  had 
kept  at  a  respectable  distance,  came  buzzing  in 
my  brain, — "  devoured  by  wolves,"  "  lost  in  the 
forest,"  "  murdered  by  brigands." 

'  The  fog  was  still  drifting  past  the  window  ; 
I  could  hear  the  wind  whistling  through  the 
leafless  trees  ;  and  then,  on  the  table,  I  caught 
sight  of  a  portrait  which  I  had  been  foolish 
enough  to  place  there,  and  that  made  me  think 
of  happier  scenes.  The  voice  which  seemed  to 
whisper  in  my  ear,  "  It  is  not  too  late,  come 
back  !  "  was  only  fancy ;  but  it  spoke  the 
truth.  It  was  not  too  late  ;  the  steamer  wbjch 
hadj  brought    me    was    still    at    anchor  in    the 

3 


34  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

harbour ;  to-morrow  I  could  re-embark ;  and 
this,  at  length,  I  resolved  to  do — I  would  return 
to  Hong  Kong  and  take  a  passage  to  Marseilles 
on  a  comfortable  steamer  in  the  usual  way.  This 
resolution  was  such  a  soothing  one,  I  fell  asleep. 

'  When  I  woke  next  morning  the  fever  had 
gone,  and  with  it  the  bad  weather.  The  sun 
was  shining  brightly  through  the  window  ;  he 
had  swept  the  fog  from  the  street  and  the  clouds 
from  the  sky,  and  he  swept  away  the  mists 
from  my  spirit  too.  I  could  laugh  at  the  croak- 
ing ravens  now,  and,  lest  I  should  be  again 
tempted  to  take  them  seriously,  determined  to 
start  off  at  once.  So,  procuring  at  the  market 
a  6-lb.  loaf  and  other  provisions  for  the  journey, 
in  a  few  hours  Vladivostock,  with  its  steamers, 
was  behind  me,  and,  as  fast  as  three  Russian 
post-horses  could  go,  I  was  making  my  way  to 
the  Siberian  wilds.' 

This  is,  in  some  respects,  a  representative 
experience  ;  and  few,  except  Russians,  attempt 
to  cross  the  country  from  this  side  without 
hearing  plenty  of  these  gloomy  admonitions. 
It  is  not  merely  those  who  know  nothing  of 
Siberia  who  offer  them.  A  Russian  consul, 
who  had  once  performed  this  journey,  told  me 
that  nothing  in  the  world  could  induce  him  to 
attempt  it  agam,  and  he  did  his  best  to  persuade 
me   to  turn  back.     Such  turning  back  is  not 


THE    START  35 

infrequent.  Quite  recently  a  party  of  French 
residents  in  China,  who  had  set  out  for  Europe 
by  this  route,  after  a  three  or  four  days'  journey 
gave  it  up,  and  came  back  to  the  coast  in  a 
woeful  plight. 

The  present  Czar  of  Russia  returned  by  the 
Siberian  post-road  to  St.  Petersburg  after  his 
visit  to  China  and  Japan  ;  but  all  the  resources 
of  the  country  were  at  his  disposal,  and  such 
luxurious  accommodation  and  entertainment 
were  provided  for  him  at  every  stage,  that  the 
journey  was  one  long  pleasure-trip. 

Ordinary  travellers  who  need  not  hurry,  and 
who  have  funds  enough  at  their  disposal  to  pro- 
vide their  own  conveyance  and  take  a  servant 
with  them,  together  with  a  good  supply  of  pro- 
visions, cooking  utensils,  and  bedding,  may 
escape  the  most  serious  hardships  of  such  way- 
faring ;  but  those  who  have  been  accustomed 
always  to  the  comforts  of  Western  life  and  modes 
of  travel,  and  who  attempt  to  cross  Siberia  in 
the  usual  way,  must  expect  to  find  the  journey 
rough  and  wearisome  in  the  extreme. 

There  are  no  great  dangers  to  be  feared.  Ex- 
cept a  few  special  ones  connected  with  the  wild 
and  unsettled  state  of  the  country,  the  risks  of 
Siberian  travel  are  simply  those  of  a  ten  miles' 
drive  along  any  country  road,  multiplied  by  a 
few  hundreds  to  represent  the  longer  distance. 


36  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

It  is  these  appalling  distances  which  make  the 
prospect  of  a  journey  across  Siberia  so  porten- 
tous, and  the  actual  experience  of  it  so  fatiguing. 
From  one  town  to  the  next  is  sometimes  as  far 
as  the  whole  length  of  England.  It  is  not  the 
demands  upon  one's  strength  or  patience  made 
by  any  one  day's  journey,  but  the  uninter- 
mitting  succession  of  them  from  week  to  week, 
and  month  to  month,  which  makes  this  travel 
so  exhausting  ;  and,  unless  one  has  the  means 
of  carrying  a  good  supply  of  provisions  with 
him,  he  must  be  content  with  the  simplest 
fare.  After  leaving  Vladivostock  there  is  no 
hotel  of  any  kind  within  a  thousand  miles.  Ex- 
cept when  on  a  steamer,  I  did  not  get  meat  at 
more  than  half  a  dozen  places  between  the  Pacific 
coast  and  Europe.  Milk  and  eggs  and  bread 
and  tea  make  a  fairly  nutritious  dietary  ;  but, 
after  a  few  months  of  such  a  menu,  a  little  variety 
appears  desirable. 

But  it  is  not  the  diet  only  which  is  mono- 
tonous. There  is  a  monotony  of  everything. 
Siberian  scenery,  as  we  have  already  shown,  is 
varied  by  river,  forest,  mountain,  plain  ;  but 
of  everything  there  is  too  much.  The  rivers  are 
so  long,  the  plains  so  wide,  the  forests  so  vast, 
and  the  mountain  ranges  cover  such  an  extensive 
area,  that  one  tires  of  each  by  turns. 

It  is  no  wonder  that  some  of  those  who  com- 


THE    START  37 

mence  this  journey  soon  give  it  up.  Except 
they  have  been  accustomed  to  the  hardships  of 
Siberian  Hfe,  no  women  or  chilchren,  nor  any  one 
not  in  robust  health,  should  be  subjected  to  it. 
But  if  you  are  a  seasoned  traveller,  not  de- 
pressed by  solitude,  tough  as  leather,  patient  as 
a  mule,  not  at  all  fastidious  about  what  you 
eat  or  drink,  nor  about  the  condition  of  your 
skin  and  clothing,  nor  about  where  you  sleep  at 
night, — whether  in  bed,  or  on  the  floor,  or  in 
a  jolting  cart, — if  you  are  such  a  traveller,  you 
may  cross  Siberia  as  the  Russians  cross  it,  and 
quite  as  much  enjoy  the  journey. 


CHAPTER    V 

FROM  THE  COAST  TO  LAKE  KHANKA,  BY  TARANTASS 

Outside  Vladivostock  we  are  in  the  wilds,  for 
there  are  no  suburbs,  and,  as  we  lose  sight  of 
the  buildings  of  the  town,  the  primaeval  forest 
at  once  comes  into  view.  A  broad  avenue  has 
been  cut  through  it,  and  this  is  our  road.  We 
cannot  see  far  before  us,  for  this  forest-covered 
land  has  been  tossed  into  big,  billowy  undula- 
tions, and  our  way  winds  among  them.  Turning 
to  the  right  or  left,  hour  after  hour,  reveals  but 
an  endless  variety  of  the  same  woodland  scenes  ; 
but  at  length  we  emerge  into  the  open,  and  from 
the  summit  of  a  treeless  knoll  have  a  distant 
view  of  the  white  ice-fields  of  the  sea  ;  then 
again  we  dip  down  into  the  forest,  and  between 
'  palisades  of  pine-trees  '  go  on  and  on,  until 
after  a  run  of  twenty  miles  we  come  suddenly 
upon  a  clearing,  and  our  tired  horses  are  pulled 
up  at  the  post-station,  which  terminates  the  first 
stage  of  our  journey. 

I  had  looked  forward  to  my  arrival  at  this 

38 


THE    COAST   TO    LAKE   KHANKA     39 

first  post-station  with  some  misgiving,  for  the 
yemschiks  are  reputed  to  be  arrant  cheats,  and 
I  had  been  assured  in  Vladivostock  that  my 
ignorance  of  the  country  would  place  me  entirely 
at  their  mercy,  and  that,  unless  I  had  allowed  a 
considerable  margin  for  this  cheating,  my  funds 
would  be  exhausted  before  I  had  completed  haK 
my  journey.  As  I  had  allowed  no  such  margin, 
there  was  some  reason  for  misgiving. 

The  usual  method  of  extortion  practised  by 
the  yemschiks  is  to  tell  the  traveller  that  no 
Government  horses  are  available  ;  that  the  half- 
dozen  or  more  seen  in  the  stables  are  bespoken, 
or  have  just  returned  from  a  journey,  and  can- 
not, of  course,  go  out  again  until  they  have  had 
their  prescribed  eight  hours'  rest ;  and  then 
obligingly  to  offer  a  private  team  of  their  own 
at  an  exorbitant  charge. 

The  yemschik  here  did  not  think  that  any 
subterfuge  was  needed  for  imposing  upon  me, 
and  I  had  myself  inadvertently  helped  him  to 
this  opinion.  My  knowledge  of  the  language  of 
the  people,  though  sufficient  for  all  the  require- 
ments of  the  journey,  was  very  imperfect,  and, 
to  avoid  unintelligible  questioning,  I  thought  it 
well  to  inform  the  yemschik,  after  ordering  a 
change  of  horses,  that  I  did  not  understand  Rus- 
sian. By  the  sinister  smile  upon  his  face,  I  saw 
at  once  the  mistake  I  had  made.     These  Siberian 


40  ACROSS   SIBERIA 

peasants  know  nothing  of  any  language  but 
their  own,  and  its  importance  is,  in  their  judge- 
ment, not  only  relative  but  absolute  ;  so  that 
for  an  Englishman  to  learn  English,  or  a  French- 
man French,  without  learning  Russian  at  the 
same  time,  is  to  them  an  evidence  of  quite  phe- 
nomenal stupidity. 

'  Does  not  understand  Russian  !  '  I  heard  the 
yemschik  repeat,  with  a  chuckle  to  himself. 

He  repeated  it  again  while  sitting  at  the  table 
to  write  my  bill,  and,  as  he  was  just  then  scratch- 
ing his  head  over  what  ought  not  to  have  been 
a  very  puzzling  calculation,  I  think  he  must  have 
been  trying  to  decide  how  much  beyond  the 
tariff  rates  he  might  prudently  extort. 

He  evidently  put  some  restraint  upon  his 
cupidity,  for  he  only  added  about  50  per  cent, 
to  the  legitimate  charge,  and,  as  the  excess 
amounted  to  less  than  two  roubles,  I  would  gladly 
have  paid  it  to  avoid  delay  had  I  not  known 
that  doing  so  would  expose  me  to  similar  exac- 
tions at  the  hundred  and  more  post-stations 
ahead  of  me,  and  thus  increase  my  expenditure 
by  many  pounds.  So  I  flatly  refused  to  pay 
more  than  the  authorized  charges  posted  on  the 
wall  before  me.  The  yemschik  M^as  quite  taken 
aback  at  finding  that  one  who  did  not  under- 
stand Russian  was  yet  able  to  read  it,  and  he 
could  hardly  have  looked  more  bewildered  if  be 


THE    COAST   TO    LAKE    KHANKA     41 

had  seen  a  new-born  baby  get  up  and  speak  ; 
but,  as  I  persisted  in  my  refusal,  his  surprise  gave 
place  to  indignation,  and  he  declared  that  if  I 
would  not  pay  the  sum  he  asked,  I  should  not 
have  the  horses,  '  I  must  then,'  said  I,  '  try  to 
make  myself  as  comfortable  as  I  can  here.' 

The  post-station  was  simply  a  series  of  wooden 
huts  and  sheds  and  stables,  around  a  large  quad- 
rangular yard,  the  whole  being  enclosed  within 
a  strong  pine-log  stockade.  One  of  the  huts  at 
every  post-station  is  reserved  for  the  use  of 
travellers  ;  and  this  hut  is  not  merely  the  best 
but  often  the  only  shelter  of  any  kind  obtainable 
throughout  a  journey  of  many  hundred  miles. 
It  measures  about  twenty  feet  long  bj^  about 
fourteen  mde,  and  is  usually  divided  by  a  par- 
tition into  two  apartments.  The  inside  arrange- 
ments are  of  the  simplest  kind.  Its  walls  and 
floors  are  of  plain  deal,  and  so  is  its  furniture, 
which  consists  of  a  table,  a  few  chairs,  and  a 
bench  about  two  feet  wide. 

In  such  a  room  I  established  myself  to  try  the 
issue  with  the  yemschik.  The  day  advanced, 
and  darkness  at  length  came  on,  but  the  man 
showed  no  sign  of  yielding,  so  I  spread  my 
blankets  on  the  floor  and  went  to  sleep.  In  the 
middle  of  the  night  I  woke  at  the  sound  of  some 
one  in  the  room,  and  saw  a  man  -wath  a  lantern 
moving  towards  me.     It  was  only  the  yemschik  ; 


42  ACROSS   SIBERIA 

and  when  I  asked  him  what  he  wanted,  he  said, 
'  I  will  take  a  rouble  less  for  the  horses.' 

'  Not  a  kopek  more  than  the  tariff  rate,'  was 
my  reply,  and  the  man  left  me  again  to  the  dark- 
ness and  my  reflections. 

But  he  was  evidently  beginning  to  feel  uneasy 
lest  some  Russian  officer  should  pass  that  way — 
as  at  any  hour  he  might — and  the  attempted 
extortion  should  get  reported  at  head  quarters. 
The  next  morning  he  was  most  obliging,  inquired 
when  I  wished  to  start,  had  the  horses  brought 
out  at  once,  asked  for  and  received  the  legal  hire, 
and  I  was  soon  on  my  way  again. 

I  had  no  further  difficulty  of  this  kind.  At 
the  next  station  I  said  nothing  about  the  slender- 
ness  of  my  acquaintance  with  the  Russian 
language,  but  simply  gave  my  orders  to  the 
yemschik,  and  they  were  promptly  attended  to. 
Though  I  had  to  change  the  whole  turnout — • 
horses,  tarantass,  and  driver — I  was  off  again 
within  twenty  minutes  from  the  time  of  my 
arrival. 

This  part  of  the  post-road  ran  through  a  lonely 
and  unsettled  country.  There  was  no  house  of 
any  kind,  not  even  a  wayside  cottage,  between 
one  station  and  another.  A  wreath  of  smoke  in 
the  distance  sometimes  led  us  to  expect  one,  but 
on  coming  nearer  we  found  a  Httle  company  of 
Russian  emigrants  or  soldiers,  who,  after  a  long 


THE    COAST   TO    LAKE    KHANKA     43 

tramp,  had  found  a  convenient  resting-place, 
and,  on  the  ground  padded  with  withered  pine- 
leaves,  were  lounging  round  a  fire  to  boil  the 
millet  which,  with  black  bread  and  tea,  con- 
stitutes their  daily  food. 

To  make  up  for  time  lost  at  the  first  post- 
station,  I  pushed  on  all  day  from  stage  to  stage 
as  fast  as  possible.  The  air  was  cold  and  brac- 
ing, and  there  was  not  at  this  season  anything 
to  tempt  one  to  linger  by  the  way.  The  frost 
had  only  just  broken,  and  the  whole  country  was 
still  in  winter  dress.  The  snow  had  gone  from 
the  level  ground  ;  but  the  places  where  it  had 
gathered  in  deep  drifts,  or  banked  itself  up  beside 
the  road,  were  still  marked  by  heaps  of  ice.  All 
around  us  was  a  waste  of  faded  leaves  and 
withered  vegetation  ;  and  in  one  place,  giving 
a  deeper  shadow  to  the  desolation,  was  a  lonely 
Siberian  graveyard.  It  was  only  a  small  en- 
closure, separated  from  the  wilds  by  a  rough 
wooden  paling,  and  containing  fifty  or  sixty 
graves,  each  marked  by  a  white  wooden  cross. 
Except  on  the  fir-trees  there  were  no  green  leaves 
to  be  seen,  but  the  sombre  brown  of  road  and 
forest  was  not  without  relief,  for  the  sun  was 
shining  over  white  banks  of  cloud,  and  every- 
thing which  could  refiect  his  radiance — the  silver 
bark  of  the  birch-trees,  and  the  clumps  of  ever- 
lasting daisies  which  here  and  there  shone  out 


44  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

from  the  surrounding  masses  of  dead  leaves  like 
bits  of  gold — did  their  best  to  brighten  up  the 
scene ;  while  the  catkins  hanging  from  the 
v»dllow-boughs  told  us  of  the  coming  spring-time, 
and  the  white  crosses  on  the  graves  of  the  resur- 
rection morning. 

After  a  long  spin  through  this  %vild  scenery 
and  wintry  air,  one  can  appreciate  the  comforts 
of  the  travellers'  room  at  the  post-station.  In 
summer  these  wooden  shelters  swarm  with  ver- 
min, but  from  such  torment  travellers  at  this 
season  of  the  year  are  free.  There  is  no  fire- 
grate to  be  seen,  but  a  big  brick  bread-oven, 
whose  mouth  opens  outside  on  to  the  stableyard, 
projects  into  one  corner  of  the  room.  Whether 
the  yemschiks  are  baking  bread  or  not.  Imperial 
order  directs  that  plenty  of  good  logs  shall  be 
burnt  in  this  oven  every  day,  and  so,  however 
intense  the  cold  outside,  the  travellers'  room  is 
always  comfortably  warm.  In  Siberia  this  is 
not  so  much  a  luxury  as  a  necessity,  for  it  would 
be  impossible  to  cross  these  extensive  tracts  of 
country  in  the  mnter-time  without  the  oppor- 
tunity of  thawing  oneself  now  and  then  upon 
the  way.  There  are  no  provisions  to  be  had 
at  any  of  these  stations  except  milk  and  eggs 
and  coarse  black  bread,  but  there  is  always 
ready  for  the  traveller  at  five  minutes  notice  a 
samovar  of  boiling  water.     A  samovar  is  simply 


THE    COAST    TO    LAKE    KHANKA     45 

a  large  brass  urn  with  a  hollow  cylinder  running 
up  through  the  middle  of  it  to  contain  burning 
charcoal,  and  thus  to  keep  the  water  boiling 
as  long  as  required.  With  the  samovar  the 
yemschik  brings  a  small  teapot  and  a  glass 
goblet ;  the  traveller  himself  must  provide  the 
tea  and  sugar. 

The  sissing  of  the  samovar  sounded  specially 
cheerful  to  me  that  night  after  my  first  long 
day's  journey.  We  did  not  arrive  at  the  station 
until  an  hour  after  sunset,  but  had  covered  a 
distance  of  over  a  hundred  miles,  and  I  had 
not  tasted  food  since  early  morning.  In  such 
circumstances,  eggs  and  milk,  with  the  tea  and 
bread  and  tinned  butter  brought  with  me  from 
the  coast,  were  enough  for  a  hearty  meal ;  one 
craved  no  other  luxuries. 

Travellers  in  Siberia  do  not  usually  limit  their 
travelling  to  the  daytime.  They  get  what  sleep 
they  require  in  the  tarantass,  and  never  stop 
except  to  change  their  horses  until  they  reach 
their  journey's  end.  But,  not  being  yet  accus- 
tomed to  this  mode  of  travel,  one  long  day  of  it 
was  sufficiently  fatiguing,  and  as  the  travellers' 
room  at  this  station  seemed  so  snug  and  quiet  I 
resolved  to  stay  here  till  morning.  It  was  a 
lonely  spot,  no  other  house  Avithin  many  miles, 
and  the  forest  closed  round  the  station  on  every 
side.     The  yemschiks  and  their  families  were  in 


46  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

the  neiglibouring  log-huts,  and  I  had  the  travel- 
lers' hut  to  myself.  On  the  pre^aous  night,  not 
knowing  what  might  happen,  I  had  slept  in  my 
clothes,  but  all  seemed  so  private  and  secluded 
here  that  I  thought  I  might  venture  to  sleep  in 
the  ordinary  way.  So,  having  arranged  my 
rugs  and  blankets  on  the  wooden  bench,  I  un- 
dressed, turned  the  lamp  low,  and  lay  down  for 
a  long  night's  rest. 

I  suppose  I  had  been  asleep  for  several  hours, 
when  the  tramp  of  horses  woke  me,  and  a  minute 
afterwards  a  yemschik  entered  the  room  to 
turn  up  the  lamp,  and  in  came  a  company  of 
travellers — four  gentlemen  and  two  ladies.  To 
have  one's  sleep  disturbed  and  one's  bedroom 
invaded  in  this  unceremonious  fashion  was  more 
than  I  was  prepared  for  ;  but  when  I  caught 
sight  of  the  ladies  I  was  horrified  to  think  of 
my  deshabille,  and  I  had  barely  time  to  snatch 
my  garments  from  the  chair  on  which  I  had 
placed  them,  when  one  of  the  ladies  advanced 
to  take  possession  of  it.  I  bundled  my  clothes 
under  the  blankets  as  quickly  as  I  could,  and 
then  made  desperate  efforts  to  put  them  on  ; 
but  any  one  who  has  ever  tried,  as  an  experi- 
ment, to  dress  himself  beneath  heavy  blankets 
and  a  big  fur  rug  on  a  rickety  bench  scarcely 
eighteen  inches  wide,  will  understand  how  im- 
possible it  is.     I  was  once  within  a  hair's-breadth 


THE    COAST   TO    LAKE    KHANKA     47 

of  a  dreadful  catastrophe ;  for,  had  not  a  heavy 
person  been  sitting  on  the  chair  I  suddenly 
gripped  to  restore  my  lost  equilibrium,  the  bench 
would  have  turned  over  and  rolled  me  into  the 
middle  of  the  room. 

I  was  not  rash  enough  to  disregard  this  warn- 
ing, and,  lest  something  worse  should  happen, 
I  resolved  to  lie  as  still  as  possible  until  the 
people  were  asleep.  I  had  not  to  wait  long. 
The  travellers  had  evidently  had  a  weary  journey, 
perhaps  of  many  days,  and  after  a  hasty  supper 
each  selected  a  place  upon  the  floor  for  rugs 
and  blankets,  and  in  a  few  minutes  I  was  the 
only  one  in  the  room  awake.  And  there  was 
no  mistake  about  it,  for  the  sleeping  was  not 
only  audible  but  loud.  The  room  was  a  small 
one,  and  I  doubt  whether  the  same  number 
of  accomplished  snorers  have  ever  been  as- 
sembled at  once  in  a  space  so  limited  before. 
It  was  awful.  The  cacophony  was  by  no  means 
uniform,  and  I  could  easily  distinguish  at  least 
five  distinct  varieties  of  snoring.  One  was 
in  high-pitched  key  like  the  subdued  mewing 
of  a  cat,  another  like  distant  moaning  of  the 
wind,  another  like  the  squeaking  of  an  unoiled 
pump,  another  like  the  growling  of  a  dog,  and 
yet  another  like  the  snorting  of  a  horse.  When 
the  concert  was  in  full  swing  I  got  up  to  dress, 
the  noise  assuring   me   that   I  might   take  my 


48  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

time  about  it.     I  never  knew  before  that  dis- 
cord could  be  so  composing. 

Being  dressed,  I  felt  like  a  different  being. 
The  craven,  shrinking,  coward  spirit  which  I 
had  before  gave  place  at  once  to  one  of  inde- 
pendence and  defiance.  I  began  to  feel  indig- 
nant with  the  sleepers  for  making  such  a  noise, 
— for  the  snoring,  having  served  its  purpose, 
was  no  longer  interesting,  and  threatened  to 
keep  one  awake  all  night  ;  but,  like  all  other 
noises,  one  can  get  accustomed  to  it,  and  at 
length  in  spite  of  it  I  slept  in  peace. 

When  I  woke  next  morning  the  other  travel- 
lers were  sleeping  still,  and  I  had  to  stride  over 
them  to  get  out  of  the  room.  The  yemschiks 
also,  though  moving  about  in  the  stables,  were 
hardly  yet  awake,  and  took  nearly  an  hour  to 
get  my  horses  yoked.  When  at  last  all  was 
ready,  and  I  was  about  to  step  into  the  con- 
veyance which  I  had  waited  for  so  patiently, 
another  tarantass  came  dashing  down  the  road, 
and  was  pulled  up  at  the  station.  Its  occupant 
was  a  Russian  officer,  who  no  sooner  alighted 
from  his  own  conveyance  than,  with  a  word  to 
the  yemschik,  he  sprang  into  mine  and  at  once 
drove  off.  This  is  one  of  the  commonest  vexa- 
tions of  civilian  travellers  on  the  Siberian  post- 
road,  but  they  cannot  reasonably  complain. 
'  The  king's  business  required  haste.'     The  road, 


THE    COAST   TO    LAKE    KHANKA     49 

the  supply  of  horses,  and  the  line  of  post-stations 
have  all  been  established  by  the  Government 
for  its  own  purposes.  It  is  only  by  courtesy 
that  other  travellers  have  permission  to  use 
them,  and  they  receive  that  permission  on  the 
distinct  understanding  that  if  Government 
officers  require  their  horses  they  will  deliver 
them  up  at  once. 

Another  tarantass  is  soon  brought  out,  and 
while  the  horses  are  being  yoked  we  have  time 
to  observe  the  characteristics  of  this  strange- 
looking  type  of  vehicle,  A  tarantass  is  not  a 
trap,  nor  a  buggy,  nor  a  cart,  nor  a  wagon, 
but  a  sort  of  conveyance  which  combines  the 
inconveniences  of  all.  I  suppose  it  is  specially 
adapted  for  Siberian  post-road  service,  and,  in 
the  language  of  the  naturalists,  owes  its  pecu- 
liarities of  structure  to  the  exigencies  of  its  en- 
vironment. 

There  are  two  pairs  of  wheels,  whose  axles 
are  fixed  under  the  extremities  of  a  couple  of 
parallel  poles  made  of  some  tough  kind  of  timber, 
and  measuring  from  10  to  15  feet  in  length, 
according  to  the  distance  between  the  fore  and 
aft  pair  of  wheels  ;  these  poles  compensate 
to  some  extent  for  the  absence  of  metal  springs, 
which  would  be  smashed  to  pieces  in  the  first 
wild  gallop  on  these  rough  roads.  Resting  upon 
the  parallel  poles  is  the  cradle-shaped  body  of 

4 


50  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

the  vehicle,  from  six  to  eight  feet  in  length  and 
about  five  feet  wide,  and  in  most  cases  made 
of  sheet-iron  supported  by  a  frame  of  wood. 
This  frame  is  extended  upward  at  the  back  and 
sides,  so  as  to  form  over  the  hinder  half  a  sort 
of  hood,  which  is  made  water-tight  by  an  out- 
side covering  of  leather.  There  is  a  box  in  front 
for  the  driver,  but  there  is  no  other  seat  of  any 
kind.  The  passenger's  luggage  is  carefully  ar- 
ranged at  the  bottom  of  the  conveyance,  a  layer 
of  straw  is  spread  over  it,  and  the  passenger 
himself  must  keep  things  in  position  by  sitting 
or  reclining  on  the  top. 

The   tarantass   is   usually   drawn   by   a   team 
of    three   horses.     The    steadiest   and   strongest 
animal  is  put  in  the  shafts,  each  of  which  is  loosely 
hooked  on  to  the  vehicle,  but  is  united  to  its 
fellow  shaft  in  front  by  a  wooden  yoke  of  horse- 
shoe shape,  which  arches  over  the  horse's  neck. 
To  the  top  of  this  yoke  is  attached  the  bearing- 
rein,   and  from  it  are  suspended  two   or  three 
bells,  which  jingle  in  time  to  the  horse's  trot, 
and  perhaps  help  to  drive  off  the  wolves.     The 
other  two  horses  to  the  right  and  left  of   the 
central  one  are  attached  by  strong  rope  traces 
to    the   projecting   ends   of   the   fore   axle-tree. 
Thus  yoked,  the  three  horses  strikingly  remind 
us  of  the  teams  we  have  seen  in  pictures  of  the 
chariot  races  of  ancient  Rome. 


THE    COAST   TO    LAKE    KHANKA     51 

Having  arranged  our  baggage  in  the  tarantass, 
and  placed  ourselves  upon  the  top,  we  are  ready 
to  start.  The  horses  are  of  medium  size,  rough- 
haired,  raw-boned,  and  altogether  sorry-looking 
beasts  ;  but  their  looks  are  the  worst  part  of 
them,  for  they  have  not  only  plenty  of  '  go  ' 
in  them,  but  plenty  of  staying  power  as  well, 
and,  often  after  a  most  despondent  contempla- 
tion of  the  team  provided  for  me,  I  have  found 
myself  travelling  at  quite  unusual  speed,  and 
keeping  it  up  from  hour  to  hour. 

And  now  the  yemschik,  in  his  sheepskin  coat, 
and  with  a  fur  cap  upon  his  head,  mounts  the 
box,  and  off  we  go.  He  has,  of  course,  a  whip, 
and  the  two  side  horses  stand  out  on  either  side, 
at  an  angle  of  several  degrees  from  the  line  of 
progress,  that  they  may  keep  their  eye  upon 
that  whip.  But  the  driver  does  not  use  it  much  ; 
he  can  do  so  when  required,  as  the  horses  evi- 
dently know,  but  on  ordinary  occasions  it  is 
quite  enough  to  raise  his  hand.  He  regulates 
his  horses'  speed  by  talkmg  to  them  ;  whether 
or  not  they  understand  Russian,  he  treats  them 
as  if  they  did.  While  they  are  going  satisfac- 
torily he  calls  them  his  '  little  turtle-doves  ' ; 
as  their  speed  slackens  he  begms  to  use  terms 
which  are  not  so  complimentary  and  endearing  ; 
and  when  at  length  his  patience  is  exhausted 
he   calls   them   awful   names — names   so   awful, 


62  ACROSS   SIBERIA 

indeed,  and  uttered  with  such  emphasis,  that 
at  the  sound  of  them  the  horses  usually  rush 
off  in  a  fright. 

Every  Russian  traveller  in  Siberia  carries  one 
or  two  large  pillows  with  him.  He  may  have 
little  other  baggage,  no  box  or  bag  or  portman- 
teau, but  he  always  has  his  pillows.  We  are 
inclined  to  laugh  at  him  at  first,  but  before  one 
stage  of  our  journey  is  completed  we  see  that 
laughter  would  be  more  appropriate  the  other 
way.  The  roads  of  Siberia  are  as  well  made 
and  as  well  preserved  as  one  could  reasonably 
expect  in  such  a  thinly-populated  region,  but 
they  are  rough  roads  at  the  best.  If  the  course 
is  obstructed  by  a  bit  of  swampy  land  or  a  mud- 
hole,  a  few  logs  are  rolled  into  it,  and  sometimes 
a  considerable  extent  of  quaggy  road  is  made 
practicable  in  this  way — by  covering  it  with  a 
transverse  layer  of  tree-trunks.  The  tarantass, 
wherever  possible,  is  always  driven  at  full 
gallop,  and  as  we  go  bumping  over  these 
tree-trunks  we  know  why  travellers  acquainted 
with  the  country  are  careful  to  take  pillows 
with   them. 

In  some  parts  the  road  crosses  range  after 
range  of  hills,  and  there  is  a  long  succession  of 
deep  declivities  and  steep  ascents.  At  the  bot- 
tom of  almost  every  valley  runs  a  small  river  ; 
and  if  it  is  too  deep  to  ford,  we  find  that  several 


THE    COAST   TO    LAKE    KHANKA     53 

tall  pines  have  been  thrown  across  from  one 
bank  to  the  other,  a  sufficient  number  of  pine- 
logs  have  been  laid  athwart  them,  and  thus  is 
produced  that  peculiar  structure  known  as  a 
*  corduroy  bridge.' 

When  we  arrive  at  the  brow  of  the  hill  over- 
looking one  of  these  deep  valleys,  the  driver 
looks  not  only  at  the  slope  before  him  but  at 
the  steep  ascent  beyond,  and  his  aim  is  to  go 
down  the  hill  at  such  a  speed  that  the  horses 
cannot  stop  themselves  until  they  get  well  up 
the  acclivity  upon  the  other  side.  So  he  leans 
suddenly  forward,  spreads  out  his  hands  like 
wings  over  the  horses,  shouts  at  the  top  of  his 
voice,  '  Hee  !  hee  !  '  and  away  down  the  steep 
we  go,  at  such  a  break-neck  pace  that  when  we 
reach  the  corduroy  bridge  at  the  bottom  we 
strike  it  with  a  shock  which  makes  the  tarantass 
leap  into  the  air. 

Then  we  know  not  only  why  the  Russians 
always  take  pillows  with  them,  but  why  there 
is  a  cover  at  the  back  of  the  conveyance.  Here- 
tofore we  had  innocently  thought  it  was  in- 
tended to  screen  us  from  the  sunshine  and  the 
rain,  but  wo  see  now  that  it  must  be  meant  also 
to  prevent  us  from  being  shot  too  far  into  the 
air,  for  after  going  up  a  certain  distance  one's 
head  strikes  against  the  woodwork,  which  sends 
us  down  again  more  quickly  even  than  we  went 


54  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

up,  and  happy  are  we  then  if  we  have  some  good 
soft  pillows  to  fall  down  upon. 

How  did  I  like  it  ?  Wh}^  at  first — to  speak 
guardedly — not  much.  None  of  my  joints  were 
actually  dislocated,  though  several  of  them 
felt  as  if  they  were,  and  for  a  week  or  more  every 
bone  in  my  body  ached.  Many  a  time  I  re- 
gretted that  I  had  not  brought  more  pillows 
with  me.  But  the  instinct  of  self-preservation 
led  me  at  length  to  discover  the  position  of  most 
stable  equilibrium  ;  and  I  learned  so  to  adjust 
myself — holding  on  to  ropes  and  straps,  with 
one  foot  pressed  firmly  against  this  projection 
and  the  other  against  that — and  so  to  arrange 
the  straw  and  pillows,  that  after  a  little  time 
for  training  I  could  travel  like  this  all  day  and 
all  night,  and  from  day  to  day,  and  even  week 
to  week,  without  feeling  much  the  worse. 

But  it  was  trying  to  the  nerves  as  well  as  to 
the  coarser  tissues,  and  my  first  few  days  of 
tarantass-riding  were  days  of  great  anxiety. 
Often,  as  at  headlong  speed  we  shot  down  some 
deep  descent,  I  thought  we  should  be  dashed 
to  pieces  ;  but  as  this  did  not  happen,  I  came 
at  length  to  regard  these  mad  gallops  with  in- 
difference, and  at  last  with  reckless  enjoyment. 
The  spirit  of  the  Russian  driver  so  infected  me 
that  we  never  seemed  to  go  too  fast.  I  could 
feel  the  exhilarating  influence  of  the  wild  rushing 


THE    COAST    TO    LAKE    KHANKA     55 

of  the  steeds  ;  and  often,  as  we  prepared  for  a 
daring  dash  down  some  precipitous  hillside, 
when  the  yemschik  shouted  '  Hee  !  Hee  !  '  the 
horses  heard  a  second  voice  repeating  it. 

Our  tarantass  experiences  in  this  part  of  the 
journey  were  not  always  so  exciting.  About 
a  hundred  and  fifty  miles  to  the  north  of  Vladi- 
vostock  the  post-road  dips  down  from  the  hill- 
country,  and  half  loses  itself  in  a  swampy  plain. 
This  plain  is  part  of  an  extensive  tract  of  low- 
land, which  fills  up  the  angle  betv/een  the  right 
bank  of  the  Usuri  and  the  lower  waters  of  the 
Amoor.  In  a  comparatively  recent  geological 
period  it  was  covered  by  the  sea,  and  some  of 
the  rivers  which  run  through  it  do  not  even 
yet  seem  quite  decided  as  to  the  channel  in  which 
they  ought  to  flow.  Often  in  the  early  summer 
they  break  out  over  the  plain,  inundating  hun- 
dreds of  square  miles  of  country,  and  making 
this  part  of  the  post-road  quite  impassable. 

We  had  no  fear  of  floods  so  early  in  the  year, 
but  the  winter  is  the  only  season  in  which  this 
marshy  region  can  be  crossed  without  some 
apprehension  of  disaster  or  delay.  For  eight 
hours  we  had  been  picking  our  way  through 
the  morass  ;  we  ought  to  have  reached  the  next 
station  in  less  than  half  the  time,  but  no  station 
was  yet  in  sight,  nor  had  we,  since  we  started, 
seen  a  sign  of  any  human  being  or  human  dwell- 


56  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

ing-place.  There  was  no  reliable  track  for  us 
to  follow,  and  our  yemschik  made  many  a  long 
detour  in  the  hope  of  keeping  on  solid  ground. 
But  in  spite  of  his  care  and  patience  our  taran- 
tass  gave  a  sudden  lurch,  and  sank  up  to  the 
axles  in  a  mud-hole.  All  our  efforts  to  extricate 
it  were  in  vain.  The  driver  urged  the  horses 
until  the  two  side  ones  broke  their  traces  and 
scoured  away  over  the  plain.  The  horse  in  the 
shafts  did  his  best  to  follow  them,  but  his  hind 
feet  were  fast  in  the  slough,  and  he  could  only 
use  the  one  free  forefoot  to  dash  mud  mto  my 
face.  I  leaped  out  on  to  a  little  patch  of  dry 
land — a  sort  of  island  in  the  swamp — and  then 
the  driver,  having  released  the  horse  from  the 
shafts  and  caught  the  two  others,  rode  away 
with  them  to  the  next  station,  six  or  seven  miles 
distant,  to  get  another  vehicle. 

We  had  to  wait  three  hours  for  his  return  ; 
and  for  testing  the  delights  of  isolation  in  a  swamp 
three  hours  is  long  enough.  A  Russian  traveller 
had  asked  me  at  a  previous  station  to  allow 
him,  for  the  next  stage  or  two,  to  share  my  taran- 
tass,  so  I  had  one  companion.  The  day  was  dull 
and  dreary,  and  the  scenery  was  like  it.  We 
had  an  uninterrupted  view  of  the  horizon  and 
the  intervening  plain,  but  there  was  nothing 
better  to  be  seen  than  a  few  tufts  of  withered 
grass  and  bulrushes. 


THE   COAST   TO    LAKE    KHANKA     57 

Our  presence  in  this  sequestered  spot  was 
slightly  suggestive  of  a  picnic,  but  when  I  tried 
to  fancy  that  it  was — to  make  the  time  pass  more 
pleasantly — my  imagination  was  not  equal  to 
the  effort.  Picnics  usually  take  place  in  warm 
summer  weather  ;  I  was  shivering  with  cold. 
At  a  picnic  a  provision  basket  is  essential,  and  it 
was  specially  essential  in  this  case,  for  I  had  not 
had  anything  whatever  to  eat  or  drink  since  the 
preceding  day.  Picnics  are  always  graced  with 
a  few  fair  specimens  of  the  heavenher  half  of  our 
humanity,  but  the  wildest  vagaries  of  fancy 
could  not  associate  ideas  of  beauty  with  this 
rough,  bearded  Russian. 

No  ;  whatever  else  our  position  was,  it  cer- 
tainly was  not  romantic.  There  was  not  much 
to  see,  and  there  was  still  less  for  us  to  do.  The 
Russian  wished  he  had  a  pipe,  or  at  least  some 
tobacco  ;  and  I  mshed  I  had — it  must  have 
been  a  book ;  but  whichever  was  the  more 
virtuous  Avish,  both  v/ere  equally  in  vain.  We 
could  either  sit  on  the  cold  ground  or  stand, 
but  if  we  attempted  walking  we  got  into  a  quag- 
mire. The  only  exercise  available  to  keep  our 
blood  in  circulation  was  shouting,  and  our  only 
amusement  was  scanning  with  a  field-glass  that 
point  on  the  horizon  where  the  yemschik  had 
disappeared.  Sometimes  these  two  occupations 
were  combined,  for  our  vision  was  too  eager  to 


58  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

be  true,  and  the  sight  of  a  bird  flying  low  in  the 
distance,  or  of  a  reed  shaken  by  the  wind,  so 
raised  our  hopes  of  rescue  that  we  yelled  at  one 
another,  '  Horses  !  '  '  Horses  !  '  '  Horses  !  ' — until 
at  length,  out  of  humour  with  disappointment, 
and  out  of  breath  with  exertion,  we  dropped 
again  into  a  morose  silence.  When  we  had 
given  up  looking  for  them,  the  horses  came  ; 
we  did  not  see  them  until  w^e  heard  the  yem- 
schik's  voice,  but  we  were  soon  on  our  way 
again,  and  at  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  we 
reached  the  post-station,  having  left  the  previous 
one  at  about  the  same  hour  in  the  morning. 
Here  I  got  my  breakfast. 

After  five  or  six  days  of  this  kind  of  travel 
I  was  quite  ready  for  a  change,  and  was  not 
sorry,  on  crossing  the  brow  of  a  low  range  of 
hills,  to  see  before  me  in  the  distance  the  white 
surface  of  Lake  Khanka,  and  to  know  that  the 
troubles  of  tarantass-riding  were  for  the 
present  at  an  end. 


CHAPTER    VI 

LIFE   IX   A   SIBERIAIN-   VILLAGE 

The  next  two  thousand  miles  of  the  post-road 
only  exist  for  six  months  in  the  year.  On  no 
other  part  of  it  is  travelling  so  easy  and  so  ex- 
peditious, and  yet  it  cost  absolutely  nothing  in 
the  making,  for  it  is  simply  the  frozen  surface 
of  Lake  Khanka  and  of  the  river  system  com- 
municating with  it. 

Except  for  its  unwonted  smoothness — the 
absence  of  shocks  and  bangs  and  joltings — 
travel  on  the  ice  is  very  similar  to  that  upon 
the  land.  At  the  post-stations  on  the  banks  of 
the  river  teams  of  horses  are  supplied,  and 
the  sledge  behind  them  is  simply  a  tarantass 
provided  with  runners  instead  of  wheels. 

When  this  part  of  the  post-road  has  been 
obHterated  by  the  heat  of  summer,  steamers 
take  the  place  of  sledge  and  horses,  and  thus 
maintain  the  continuity  of  route  ;  but  at  the 
beginning  and  end  of  every  winter  there  is  an 
indefinite  period  in  which  neither  mode  of  travel 

69 


60  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

is  available,  the  ice  being  too  abundant  for 
navigation,  and  too  weak  and  broken  for  surface 
traffic. 

In  such  a  period — just  at  the  close  of  the 
winter  season,  too  early  for  a  steamer  and  too 
late  for  a  sledge — I  reached  the  shores  of  Klianka 
Lake.  A  fortnight  before  a  traveller  had  crossed 
upon  the  ice,  but  I  gathered  from  his  conversa- 
tion that  he  had  not  very  much  enjoyed  the 
trip.  He  had  set  out  from  the  other  side  with 
a  sledge  and  three  horses  at  ten  o'clock  at  night, 
and,  as  the  distance  from  one  bank  to  the  other 
is  about  forty  miles,  it  took  upwards  of  four 
hours  to  complete  the  journey.  As  the  ice  even 
then  was  not  considered  absolutely  safe,  an 
extra  fee  had  been  paid  to  the  driver  to  reconcile 
him  to  the  risk.  The  easy  motion  of  the  sledge 
soon  lulled  the  traveller  to  sleep,  and  he  did 
not  wake  until  midnight,  when  he  was  annoyed 
to  find  they  were  standing  still.  The  yemschik 
had  only  stopped  to  get  his  pipe  and  some  to- 
bacco for  a  smoke  ;  but  as  this  is  a  rather  slow 
and  difficult  operation  for  one  so  encumbered 
with  heavy  sheepskins,  he  tried  to  divert  the 
attention  of  the  evidently  impatient  traveller 
by  narrating  a  few  reminiscences.  '  I  recollect,' 
said  he,  '  that  just  about  a  year  ago,  on  a  pitch- 
dark  night  like  this,  as  near  as  possible  to  this 
same   hour,   and  within  a  yard  or  two  of  the 


LIFE    IN   A   SIBERIAN   VILLAGE     61 

very  spot  where  we  are  now — some  twenty 
miles  or  so  from  either  shore — the  ice  suddenly 
gave  way,  and  a  sledge  and  three  horses,  with 
two  travellers  and  a  yemschik,  went  down 
wdthout  a  moment's  warning  to  the  bottom  of 
the  lake.' 

The  traveller  did  not  seem  to  appreciate  this 
story,  or,  if  he  did,  he  showed  his  appreciation 
in  a  very  peculiar  way.  He  called  the  man  a 
di'i veiling  idiot,  and  threatened  to  knock  him 
off  the  box  if  he  did  not  instantly  shut  up  his 
yarning  and  drive  on. 

I  don't  think  the  traveller  slept  much  during 
the  remainder  of  the  journey.  He  was  an 
educated  man,  and  was  reputed  to  have  some 
taste  in  music,  but  I  heard  him  say  that  the 
sweetest  sound  he  ever  heard  was  that  of  sledge- 
runners,  in  the  early  morning,  crunching  through 
the  shingle  of  a  beach. 

There  was  evidently  no  chance  for  me  to 
continue  my  journey  until  the  south  wind  brought 
a  thaw,  but  the  delay  was  not  without  its  com- 
pensation. I  had  been  so  shaken,  not  to  say 
bruised  and  battered,  by  the  antics  of  the  taran- 
tass,  that  I  could  appreciate  the  benefit  of  rest  ; 
and  a  week  or  two  in  Kamenrubeloff  could  not 
fail  to  give  me  some  interesting  information 
with  regard  to  Siberian  village  life. 

Kamenrubeloff  means  '  fisherman's  rock,'  and 


62  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

there  is  no  doubt  a  romance  connected  with 
the  designation,  but  I  only  know  it  as  the  name 
of  a  village  on  Lake  Khanka.  It  is  a  dreary 
httle  place,  and  especially  so  at  this  season  of 
the  year.  One  could  not  walk  far  eastward 
without  coming  abruptly  to  the  edge  of  the 
cUff-like  alluvial  bank,  which  falls  precipitously 
forty  or  fifty  feet  to  the  lake  shore  ;  but  around 
the  village  on  all  other  sides  lay  an  open,  un- 
dulating country,  only  partially  reclaimed  and 
cultivated.  On  some  of  the  hillsides  were  woods 
of  birch  and  alder,  but,  except  the  brown  rem- 
nants of  the  pre\ious  summer's  foliage,  there 
was  hardly  a  leaf  or  a  grass  blade  to  be  seen. 

Most  Siberian  villages  have  only  one  street, 
which,  however,  is  broad  enough  for  a  market- 
place ;  but  Kamenrubeloff  has  a  second  equally 
broad  street,  cutting  the  first  at  right  angles. 
The  village  has  no  terraces  and  no  two-storied 
houses,  its  dwellings,  with  the  exception  of  the 
soldiers'  quarters  in  the  suburbs,  consisting 
entirely  of  pine-log  cottages,  which,  with  a 
varying  interval  between  them,  are  ranged  on 
either  side  of  the  road.  Though  small,  they  are 
snug  and  substantial  structures.  The  logs  of 
which  they  are  built  are  so  shaped  as  to  fit 
closely  to  the  adjacent  ones,  they  are  dovetailed 
into  each  other  at  the  ends,  and  support  a  double 
roof    of    thatch    and   boarding.     With    few   ex- 


LIFE    IN   A   SIBERIAN   VILLAGE     63 

ceptions  the  outside  timbers  are  discoloured  by 
age,  and  the  only  paint  about  them  is  on  the 
window-frames  and  doors. 

Most  of  the  cottages  stand  back  from  the 
road,  each  one  in  a  small  fenced  enclosure  of 
its  own,  within  which  might  be  seen  some  farm- 
ing implements,  a  rough  Siberian  cart,  a  horse, 
a  cow,  a  few  black  pigs,  and  perhaps  some  barn- 
door fowls.  Among  the  houses  which  stand 
close  upon  the  street  are  a  few  shops  for  the 
sale  of  vodka,  groceries,  and  clothing ;  but 
there  is  nothing  to  distinguish  them  from  the 
neighbouring  cottages  except  the  wares  exposed 
in  their  ^\indows. 

As  there  was  no  hotel  in  the  village,  nor  a 
lodging-house  of  any  kind,  I  had  to  seek  for 
shelter  in  one  of  the  private  houses.  Pushkoff, 
the  Russian  land  surveyor  who  was  with  me 
in  the  swamp,  had  come  to  the  village,  and  was 
also  waiting  for  a  steamer,  so  he  proposed  that 
if  he  could  find  a  room  I  should  share  it  and  its 
expenses  with  him.  The  first  place  we  secured 
was  such  a  den  of  misery  that  even  Pushkoff 
was  dissatisfied,  but  the  next  day  we  succeeded 
in  finding  more  comfortable  quarters — a  clean 
little  room  of  about  fourteen  feet  by  ten,  its 
walls,  ceiUng,  and  floor  of  smooth  unpainted 
pine,  and  having  two  small  windows  —  one 
looking   into   the   farmyard    at    the   back,    and 


64  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

the  other  out  upon  the  road.  Its  furniture 
consisted  of  two  chairs,  a  table,  and  a  broad 
wooden  bench,  which  served  me  for  a  bed  ;  the 
Russian,  characteristically,  preferred  to  sleep 
upon  the  floor. 

He  was  vexed  that  I  would  not  consent  to 
share  board  as  w^ell  as  lodging  with  him,  but  I 
knew  too  much  already  of  his  household  ways. 
He  was  a  good-natured  man,  and  when  I  was 
passing  through  the  village  where  he  lived  he 
invited  me  to  dinner  at  his  house.  There  were 
three  of  us  at  table — Pushkoff,  his  wife,  and 
myself  ;  we  had  each  a  knife  and  fork,  but  there 
were  no  plates,  and  we  all  three  had  to  help 
ourselves  out  of  the  one  dish,  which  contained 
a  mixture  of  some  kind  of  minced  meat  and 
vegetables.  Such  an  arrangement  is  convenient  ; 
it  saves  a  good  deal  of  dish-washing  and  other 
labour,  but  it  has  this  great  disadvantage — it 
makes  it  impossible  for  a  slow  eater  to  get  his 
fair  share  of  the  feast  ;  so  I  told  Pushkoff  that 
it  would  be  better  for  each  of  us  to  cater  for 
himself. 

Soon  after  he  brought  in  a  pickled  salmon, 
which  he  had  purchased  from  a  farmer  in  the 
village,  and  laid  it,  dripping  with  brine,  upon 
our  only  table  ;  there  it  lay  until  the  Russian 
had  eaten  it,  which,  as  the  fish  weighed  over 
twenty  pounds,  was  not  for  a  considerable  time. 


LIFE    IN   A    SIBERIAN   VILLAGE     65 

He  had  no  stated  hours  for  meals,  and  no  stated 
number  of  them  ;  but  whenever  he  felt  hungry 
he  cut,  with  a  large  pocket-knife,  a  slice  out  of 
the  salmon  and  ate  it  raw,  washing  it  down 
with  a  glass  or  two  of  tea  or  vodka. 

The  table  was  soon  covered  from  one  end  to 
the  other  with  brine  and  fragments  of  fish,  and 
the  only  place  where  I  could  have  meals  in  com- 
fort was  the  window-sill  ;  but  during  my  first 
few  days  in  Kamenrubeloff  the  difiiculty  was  to 
get  the  meals.  Black  bread  and  salt  fish  seem  to 
be  the  staple  food  of  these  Siberian  peasants, 
and  I  did  not  find  either  to  my  taste.  The  rye- 
flour,  of  which  the  bread  is  made,  is  said  to  be 
mixed  with  powdered  pine-bark,  and  certainly 
its  taste  is  pungent  enough  for  anything  ;  how- 
ever hungry,  a  finger's-breadth  of  it  was  sufficient 
to  take  away  my  appetite.  I  had  to  have  salt 
fish,  whether  I  would  or  not ;  though  I  never 
actually  ate  a  morsel  of  it  in  this  village,  I  feasted 
my  eyes  on  it  all  day,  and  imbibed  its  exhala- 
tions all  night ;  and  if  I  ever  felt  a  craving  for 
food  I  did  not  possess,  I  had  only  to  look  at  that 
fish-smeared  table,  and  the  pangs  of  hunger  were 
allayed.  Beef  and  mutton  were  only  seen  among 
the  villagers  on  rare  occasions,  and,  as  to  milk 
and  eggs,  the  people  told  me  that  the  cows  were 
dry,  and  that  the  hens  had  not  yet  begun  to 
lay.     But  by  persistent  search  I  discovered  one 

5 


66  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

milch  cow  at  a  farm  on  the  outskirts  of  the  village  ; 
by  going  from  house  to  house  I  managed  to 
buy  up,  one  here  and  another  there,  a  score 
or  so  of  eggs  ;  then  I  met  a  Chinaman,  who 
sold  me  a  dozen  pounds  of  rice  ;  and  at  last  I 
was  so  well  provided  for — in  the  opinion  of  these 
villagers — that  I  could  fare  sumptuously  every 
day. 

It  is  a  saying  of  the  Chinese  that  '  Europeans 
must  be  a  very  dirty  people,  or  they  would  not 
find  it  necessary  to  wash  so  frequently.'  They 
would  form  a  higher  opinion  of  us  if  they  saw 
us  here.  There  were  no  facilities  for  washing 
in  these  cottages,  and  cold  water  for  such  a 
purpose  is  quite  out  of  favour  in  Siberia.  The 
peasants  sometimes  take  a  vapour  bath,  or,  in 
the  absence  of  convenience  for  this,  get  into  the 
bread  oven  when  it  has  sufficiently  cooled  down, 
and,  when  they  have  soaked  in  perspiration  long 
enough,  come  out  and  rub  themselves  briskly 
all  over  with  a  handful  or  two  of  snow.  This  is 
expected  to  keep  their  skin  clean  and  supple 
for  at  least  half  a  year. 

At  one  of  the  post-stations  I  ventured  to  hint 
that  I  would  like  a  wash.  I  was  asked  to  go 
out  into  the  yard,  where  I  saw  a  servant  standing 
with  a  teacup  of  cold  water.  Holding  out  my 
hands  she  poured  a  little  of  the  water  over  them, 
I  rubbed  my  hands  together  and  held  them  out 


LIFE    IN   A    SIBERIAN   VILLAGE     67 

again,  when  the  remaining  water  in  the  cup 
was  emptied  over  them  that  I  might  rub  it  on 
my  face  ;  and  this  is  all  the  ablution  which  even 
the  most  fastidious  consider  necessary. 

At  other  post-stations  the  assistance  of  the 
servant  is  rendered  unnecessary  by  what  the 
people  regard  as  a  very  ingenious  contrivance. 
A  small  brass  funnel  is  fixed  against  the  wall, 
about  four  feet  from  the  ground.  Any  one 
anxious  for  a  wash  has  only  to  pour  a  teacupfiil 
of  water  into  this  funnel,  and  if  he  is  quick  enough 
he  may  lave  his  hands  and  face  while  the  water 
is  trickling   through. 

Pushkoff  told  me,  the  first  day  I  spent  with 
him,  that  cold  tea  was  better  than  water  for 
washing  purposes  ;  and  in  the  evening  I  noticed 
that,  when  he  had  drunk  all  he  required,  he 
filled  up  the  teapot  again.  The  next  morning, 
before  I  had  risen  from  my  bench,  I  saw  my 
companion  sitting  on  the  front-door  step  with 
the  teapot  in  his  hand.  He  put  the  spout  to 
his  lips,  as  if  to  take  a  deep  drink,  then  replacing 
the  teapot  by  his  side,  and  making  a  syringe  of 
his  mouth,  he  held  up  his  hands  and  spirted 
the  tea  out  over  them  ;  when  he  had  rubbed 
them  sufficiently,  he  applied  more  tea  in  the 
same  way  to  rub  over  his  face,  and  his  ablution 
was  complete. 
[  There  was  plenty  of  tea  left  in  the  pot,  but  I 


68  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

preferred  to  take  my  towel  to  the  shore  of  the 
lake  ;  the  ice  had  melted  along  its  margin,  and 
its  clear  cold  water  was  good  enough  for  me  ; 
but  every  splash  involved  a  penalty,  and  some- 
times for  nearly  an  hour  after  my  hands  were 
completely  paralysed. 

With  the  exception  of  a  few  Chinese,  the 
people  of  this  village  were  typical  examples 
of  Siberian  peasantry.  Some  of  them  were 
always  in  sight  from  the  window  of  my  room — 
the  men  in  blue  blouses  and  top-boots,  with  their 
long  hair  cut  evenly  all  round,  and  half  covered 
by  bearskin  caps,  were  busy  preparing  their  gear 
for  tillage,  mending  their  houses,  or  fetching 
cartloads  of  fuel  from  the  forest ;  and  the  women 
in  their  short  print  gowns,  bareheaded,  and  as 
often  as  not  barefooted,  were  hurrying  about 
the  little  farmyards,  attending  to  their  poultry 
and  cattle. 

The  more  one  knew  of  these  people,  the  more 
interesting  they  became.  Beneath  their  rugged 
features  and  coarse  manners  beat  kind  and 
honest  hearts ;  and,  dull  and  slow-witted  as 
they  seem,  their  energy  of  character  reveals 
itself  not  only  in  their  power  of  enduring  hard- 
ship, but  in  the  dogged  determination  with  which 
they  are  subduing  this  wild  country  to  their 
service.  In  contrast  with  the  most  refined  of 
the  natives  of  that  so-called  Celestial  Empire  to 


LIFE    IN   A   SIBERIAN   VILLAGE     69 

the  south  of  them,  their  superiority  is  striking. 
In  every  circumstance  of  life  but  their  religion, 
the  Chinese  seem  to  have  the  advantage  of  them 
— better  climate,  more  fertile  soil,  and  easier 
life  ;  but  to  compare  the  two  is  like  comparing 
uncut  diamonds  with  pieces  of  polished  jade- 
stone. 

Some  of  the  villagers  were  exiles  whose  term 
of  imprisonment  had  expired,  but  most  of  them 
were  free  emigrants.  Many  of  the  settlers  in 
these  remote  regions  came  here  to  escape  oppres- 
sion, either  in  the  shape  of  the  conscription 
or  of  religious  persecution.  To  save  themselves 
from  being  sent  out  to  Siberia,  they  came  here 
of  their  own  freewill.  The  security  of  such 
fugitives  depended  upon  the  distance  to  which 
they  wandered,  and,  as  on  Russian  territory 
they  might  at  any  time  be  arrested  and  punished 
for  their  flight,  they  aimed  at  going  beyond 
the  frontier,  and  forming  settlements  on  alien 
soil.  This  district  was  the  home  of  Russian 
emigrants  before  it  formed  part  of  the  Russian 
Empire  ;  but  in  no  case  did  such  settlements 
remam  long  outside  ;  no  sooner  did  the  Govern- 
ment hear  of  a  colony  of  Russians  in  a  region 
beyond  the  frontier,  than  the  frontier  was  ex- 
tended to  include  it.  It  was  as  if  the  boundaries 
of  the  Empire  had  been  an  elastic  cord,  which 
clung  to  the  fugitives  as  they  tried  to  push  beyond 


70        ■     .-,       ACROSS    SIBERIA 

it,  so  that  whatever  spot  they  selected  for  their 
settlement  became,  because  of  such  selection, 
Russian  soil.  The  hardy  Cossacks,  living,  eating, 
sleeping  in  the  saddle,  kept  the  forefeet  of  their 
horses  on  the  receding  frontier ;  and  if,  after  the 
inclusion  by  it  of  some  extensive  tract  of  country 
in  Manchuria,  a  Chinese  mandarin  ventured  to 
suggest  that  yesterday  this  boundary  stone  was 
a  score  of  miles  to  the  westward  of  its  position 
now,  the  Cossack  curtly  answered,  '  Well,  there 
the  stone  is  now,  and  I  am  here  ;  what  have 
you  to  say  ?  ' 

Well  for  him  he  said  nothing,  but  went  quietly 
away.  And  so  the  Czar's  dominion,  with  the 
steadiness  and  persistency  of  an  advancing  tide, 
has  spread  itself  over  the  vast  territories  of 
Northern  Asia,  until  it  has  become  conterminous 
with  the  Pacific  Ocean  and  the  Japan  Sea. 

The  nearest  settlement  to  Kamenrubeloff  was 
many  miles  away,  and  there  was  absolutely  no 
scattered  population  ;  but  a  company  of  gipsies 
happened  to  have  pitched  their  tents  on  the 
outskirts  of  the  village,  and  had  spent  the  winter 
there.  They  were  the  most  respectable  and 
romantic-looking  gipsies  I  have  ever  seen — 
altogether  different  from  the  ragged,  unkempt 
creatures  one  meets  sometimes  in  English  lanes. 
By  their  aristocratic  bearing  as  they  strolled 
about   the  village,  and  by  the  rough  courtesy 


LIFE    IN   A    SIBERIAN   VILLAGE     71 

with  which  the  people  treated  them,  it  was  evi- 
dent that  they  were  by  no  means  regarded  as 
pariahs  either  by  the  villagers  or  by  themselves. 

The  men  wore  top-boots,  black  sheepskin  coats, 
and  fur  caps  ;  the  chiefs  of  the  tribe  being  dis- 
tinguished from  the  rest  by  a  row  of  bulb-shaped 
buttons  of  chased  silver  as  large  as  a  medium- 
sized  apple.  The  women  were  fond  of  red  cotton 
dresses  ;  and  those  of  higher  rank  were  made 
still  more  conspicuous  by  a  string  of  forty  or 
fifty  silver  dollars  round  the  neck.  Every  morn- 
ing a  number  of  them  passed  my  window  on  the 
way  down  to  the  lake  for  water,  which  they 
carried  up  in  bright  copper  vessels  on  their  head. 
They  were  anything  but  shy,  and  the  visits  of 
these  gipsy  ladies  were  most  unceremonious  and 
inopportune.  They  simply  opened  my  door 
and  walked  in  ;  and  if,  as  was  frequently  the 
case,  I  happened  to  be  having  dinner  when  they 
called,  they  drew  up  to  my  window-sill  dining- 
table  in  a  most  free  and  friendly  way,  and  helped 
themselves  to  whatever  they  fancied  of  my  frugal 
meal. 

The  gipsy  men  called  once  or  twice,  and  kindly 
tried  to  dissuade  me  from  venturing  farther  on 
this  journey  by  telling  me  of  the  dangers  and 
difficulties  encountered  by  themselves  in  coming 
here,  and  of  the  number  of  their  tribe  who  had 
perished  on  the  way. 


72  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

One  of  them  sometimes  came  into  the  village 
in  the  evening,  and  borrowed  an  accordion,  upon 
which  he  played  a  lively  polka  ;  and  at  once, 
as  by  a  spell,  the  doors  of  the  log-cottages  flew 
open,  and  the  villagers  came  out  and  danced 
until  the  darkness  and  chill  air  of  night  sent 
them  all  home  to  bed. 

This  was  not  the  only  music  the  village  could 
supply.  One  day,  when  quietly  sitting  in  my 
room,  I  heard  a  burst  of  singing  which  quite 
startled  me,  for  it  was  not  the  careless  droning  of 
some  peasant  sauntering  about  his  farm,  but 
singing  by  a  multitude  of  voices,  and  with  heart 
and  will.  The  air  was  a  strange  one,  but  there 
was  plenty  of  wild  stirring  music  in  it,  and  the 
time  was  perfect.  I  could  see  nothing  of  the 
singers,  but  the  sound  of  their  voices  seemed  to 
approach  so  rapidly  I  might  have  thought  them 
a  troop  of  angels  bearing  down  upon  the  village 
from  the  sky,  but  for  the  moving  cloud  of  dust 
which  now  appeared  in  the  distance,  and  through 
which  at  length  I  saw  the  shape  of  horses  and 
riders  and  the  gleam  of  polished  steel.  The 
cloud  came  on  apace,  and  in  a  few  moments 
a  company  of  Cossacks,  still  singing  their  wild 
martial  ballad,  went  sweeping  by  on  their  way 
to  some  distant  station. 

British  cavalry  sometimes  relieve,  by  singing, 
the  monotony  of  a  long  journey  ;  but  in  England 


LIFE    IN   A   SIBERIAN    VILLAGE     73 

we  generally  associate  a  vocal  chorus  out-of-doors 
with  Salvation  Army  services  or  Methodist  camp- 
meetings.  Neither  the  one  nor  the  other  is  yet 
known  in  Siberia,  but  every  important  village 
has  its  church. 

The  church  is  the  only  public  building  here. 
It  stands  in  the  middle  of  the  village,  and  is  con- 
spicuous not  only  by  its  size  but  its  appearance, 
for  the  pine-logs  of  which  it  is  constructed  are 
painted  white,  its  tower  is  topped  by  a  pale- 
green  dome,  and  above  all  shines  a  gilded  cross. 
To  see  the  building  at  a  distance,  with  a  cluster 
of  cottages  around  it,  suggests  the  fancy  of  some 
gigantic  bird  among  its  fledgelings — a  fancy  not 
altogether  false,  for  the  relationship  between 
the  church  and  the  dwellings  which  surround 
it  is  not  one  of  juxtaposition  merely  :  without  it 
Kamenrubeloff  would  be  but  a  miscellaneous 
Orssemblage  of  independent  homesteads ;  the 
presence  of  a  place  of  worship  establishes  a  bond 
between  them,  and  gives  to  the  village  some- 
thmg  of  organic  unity. 

Whatever  the  moral  character  of  these  villagers 
may  be,  they  always  reverence  the  church. 
Whenever  they  pass  by  it  they  doff  their  hat, 
and  there  are  few  who  do  not  sometimes  attend 
its  services.  For  those  who  have  to  mind  the 
house  on  Sunday  mornings,  to  allow  the  other 
members  of  the  family  to  go  to  church,  a  special 


74  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

service  is  held  every  Saturday  night.  Pushkoff, 
my  companion,  responded  promptly  to  the  call 
of  church  bells,  and  when  he  attended  service 
I  generally  went  with  him. 

Compared  with  its  exterior  of  spotless  white, 
the  inside  of  the  church  looked  gloomy,  its  dark 
pine-wood  walls  being  left  unpainted  ;  but  the 
lower  part  was  relieved  by  numerous  pictures 
and  images  of  saints,  and  there  was  no  lack  of 
paint  and  gilding  on  the  reredos  and  altar,  which 
in  Russian  churches  generally  are  even  more 
ornate  than  those  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  A 
seller  of  candles  stood  in  the  porch  ;  and  all  who 
came  to  church,  except  the  very  poor,  were 
expected  to  purchase  one.  It  was  passed  by  a 
verger  to  the  front,  where  it  was  lit  and  fixed 
in  one  of  the  numerous  candle-holders  near  the 
altar  ;  the  brilliancy  of  the  illumination  being 
supposed  to  represent  the  size  and  devoutness  of 
the  congregation. 

There  are  no  seats  in  the  building,  so  that 
worshippers  must  either  stand  or  kneel.  The 
service  was  intoned  throughout,  the  clerk  giving 
the  responses  in  deep  bass.  There  was  no  sermon, 
and  it  is  very  seldom  that  there  is  one  in  any 
of  these  Russian  churches.  The  universal  sur- 
veillance of  the  Government,  and  the  ease  with 
which  an  innocent  expression  may  be  construed 
into  heterodoxy  or  high  treason,  make  preaching 


LIFE    IN   A    SIBERIAN   VILLAGE      75 

too  risky  ;  and  as  sermons  are  not  prescribed 
parts  of  the  service,  it  is  the  safest  course  to 
omit  them  altogether. 

At  the  end  of  the  service  every  Sunday  morn- 
ing the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  was 
administered  to  a  number  of  recently  baptized 
infants.  Adults  think  it  sufficient  for  them- 
selves to  partake  of  the  ordinance  once  or  twice 
a  year,  but  it  is  considered  advisable  for  baptized 
babies  to  do  so  every  Sunday  until  they  are 
twelve  months  old.  In  all  Russian  churches 
the  bread  and  wine  are  mixed  together,  and  the 
mixture  is  administered,  both  to  children  and 
adults,  in  a  silver  spoon.  A  dozen  infants  were 
carried  by  their  mothers  to  the  altar  ;  each  in 
turn  had  a  silken  bib  arranged  under  its  chin  by 
the  priest ;  and  then,  while  the  choir  chanted, 
the  frightened  children,  some  of  whom  screamed 
outright,  received,  much  against  their  will,  the 
sacred  elements. 

After  the  conclusion  of  the  service,  the  priest 
— or  pope,  as  the  Russians  call  him — stood  in 
front  of  the  altar,  holding  out  a  large  silver 
cross.  The  entire  congregation  filed  forward  to 
the  front  to  kiss  this  cross  before  they  left  the 
church. 

It  was  rather  surprising  to  find  that  a  church 
so  ritualistic  sometimes  held  outdoor  services  ; 
but  I  happened  to  be  in  this  village  on  St.  George's 


76  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

day.  ^-VTiile  having  breakfast  in  the  early  morn- 
ing I  heard  the  tramp  of  many  feet,  and,  going 
to  the  door,  saw  the  priest  in  his  robes  of  office 
at  the  head  of  a  procession,  following  the  banner 
of  St.  George.  At  the  crossways  in  the  centre 
of  the  village  the  procession  halted,  and  soon 
I  saw,  drawing  towards  it  from  every  side,  the 
strangest  crowd  I  ever  heard  of  in  connexion 
with  church  services. 

St.  George  is  regarded  as  the  patron  saint  of 
domestic  animals,  and  it  is  believed  that  some 
special  blessing  will  rest  upon  the  cattle  if  once 
a  year,  on  this  saint's  feast-day,  they  join  in 
public  worship.  And  so  they  were  now  on 
their  way  to  the  service — flocks  of  sheep,  with 
herds  of  cattle,  swine,  and  horses,  making  when 
they  came  together  a  most  motley  congregation. 
But  the  poor  beasts  were  not  religiously  in- 
clined, or  did  not  appreciate  this  kind  of  worship, 
and  it  took  half  the  bipeds  of  the  congregation 
to  keep  the  quadrupeds  from  bolting,  one  or 
two  of  the  pigs  being  so  depraved  that  they 
knocked  their  benefactors  over  and  ran  away. 
But  when  at  length  the  service  opened,  and 
the  congregation  began  to  sing,  what  with  the 
bleating  of  the  sheep,  the  neighing  of  the  horses, 
the  bellowing  of  the  cattle,  the  squealing  of  the 
pigs,  and  the  barking  of  a  score  or  two  of 
irreverent    dogs    who    would    neither    join    the 


LIFE    IN   A   SIBERIAN   VILLAGE     77 

circle  of  the  worshippers  nor  go  away,  but  stood 
around  protesting  loudly  while  priest  and  people 
did  their  best  to  make  their  voices  heard  above 
the  others,  the  combination  made  a  chorus  the 
like  of  which,  even  in  Bedlam,  you  might  listen 
for  in  vain. 

The  social  life  of  a  little  community  of  peasants, 
in  such  a  remote  corner  of  the  earth,  might 
seem  to  an  outsider  dull.  But  the  people  them- 
selves are  not  conscious  of  this  dullness  ;  they 
know  nothing  better  than  their  village  Ufe,  and 
are  content.  They  never  see  a  newspaper, 
and  except  by  an  occasional  letter  from  their 
friends,  or  the  arrival  of  some  passing  traveller, 
have  no  means  of  knowing  what  is  happening 
in  other  portions  of  the  world  ;  but  this  only 
makes  them  take  a  deeper  interest  in  local  cir- 
cumstances, and  in  one  another's  family  affairs. 
With  so  much  in  their  own  circle  to  awaken 
interest — births  and  deaths  ;  betrothals  and 
marriages  ;  the  fortunes  of  the  battle  in  which 
they  are  engaged  with  nature  ;  the  varying 
aspects  of  sky  and  lake  and  forest,  from  season 
to  season,  and  even  from  day  to  day  ;  the  play 
and  interplay  of  human  passions  and  affections, 
with  their  multiform  developments,  tragic, 
pathetic,  or  amusing  ;  and  the  frequently  re- 
curring services  at  church,  with  the  glimpses 
they  get  there  of  the  infinite  and  the  eternal, — 


78  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

with  all  this,  these  simple  villagers  cannot  under- 
stand why  we  should  consider  their  position 
lonely  or  their  life  monotonous,  and  they  never 
think  with  anything  like  envy  of  the  residents 
in  busy  towns. 

A  day  or  two  after  St.  George's  festival  I 
noticed  that  something  unusual  was  astir,  and 
presently  one  of  the  villagers  asked  me  if  I  was 
not  going  to  see  the  wedding.  No  one  whose 
human  sympathies  are  not  completely  petrified 
can  fail  to  feel  some  thrill  of  pensive  interest 
in  a  wedding,  though  the  bridal  pair  are  utter 
strangers  and  of  the  humblest  class  ;  but  a 
Siberian  wedding  had  for  me  the  added  charm 
of  novelty,  and  I  hastened  with  the  others  to 
the  church.  A  good  congregation  was  assembled, 
and  the  bride  and  bridegroom,  children  of  peasant 
parents  in  the  neighbourhood,  were  evidently 
well  known  to  all.  They  each  appeared  to  be 
about  twenty-five  years  of  age  ;  and  with  the 
limited  means  at  their  disposal  they  had  done 
their  best  to  give  to  their  appearance  a  neatness 
befitting  the  importance  of  the  occasion.  The 
bridegroom  appeared  in  top-boots,  velveteen 
trousers  which  in  some  places  had  lost  their 
bloom,  and  an  old-fashioned  dark-blue  coat. 
The  bride  wore  a  gown  of  bright  blue  stuff,  and 
her  head  was  covered  with  a  cream-coloured 
woollen  handkerchief  fastened  beneath  her  chin. 


LIFE    IN    A   SIBERIAN   VILLAGE     79 

The  wedding  ceremony  was  not  performed 
at  the  altar,  but  in  the  centre  of  the  church. 
The  priest  received  the  couple  at  the  door,  led 
them  to  their  place,  and  the  chanting  at  once 
began.  Two  wax  candles,  each  with  a  piece 
of  red  ribbon  tied  in  a  bow  around  it,  were 
lighted  and  handed  by  the  priest,  one  to  the 
bridegroom,  and  the  other  to  the  bride  ;  re- 
minding both  of  the  necessity  for  heedfulness 
and  circumspection — keeping  both  eyes  open, 
and  taking  a  good  look  before  they  make  the 
contemplated  leap  ;  and  reminding  each  of  the 
necessity  to  be  candid  as  well  as  cautious,  to 
beware  of  all  suspicion  of  dissimulation  or  re- 
serve, to  let  their  minds  to  one  another  be  honest 
as  the  hght  and  open  as  the  day,  and  so  to  pHght 
their  troth. 

A  large  handkerchief  was  next  spread  out  on 
the  ground,  and  upon  this  handkerchief  both 
were  required  to  stand  ;  expressive  of  the  fact 
that  henceforth  they  were  to  sail  over  the  sea 
of  hfe  in  the  same  boat,  and  share  each  other's 
lot.  A  Bible  was  then  given  them  to  kiss  ; 
signifying  their  acceptance  of  that  book  as  the 
chart  by  which  to  regulate  their  course. 

A  couple  of  gold  rings  were  now  handed  to 
the  priest,  who,  having  dipped  them  in  holy 
water,  gave  one  to  each  of  the  bridal  pair.  The 
man  put  his  ring  on  the  middle  finger  of  the 


80  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

woman's  right  hand — a  token  that  henceforth 
she  belonged  exclusively  to  him  ;  and  then  the 
woman  put  her  ring  on  the  middle  finger  of  the 
man's  left  hand,  as  a  token  that  he  belonged 
exclusively  to  her. 

A  gilded  crown  was  then  brought  out  and 
placed  on  the  head  of  the  bridegroom  ;  pro- 
claiming him  the  king  of  the  new  home.  Before 
I  had  recovered  from  my  surprise  at  this,  another 
crown  was  brought  and  placed  upon  the  head 
of  the  bride  ;  proclaiming  that,  if  her  husband 
was  to  be  king  of  the  household,  she  was  to  be 
its  queen. 

The  priest  having  next  thrown  a  fold  of  his 
robe  over  their  joined  hands,  grasped  them, 
and  led  the  man  and  woman  three  times  round 
a  table,  on  which  lay  a  Bible  and  a  crucifix  ;  to 
teach  them  that  the  truth  and  the  love  of  God 
must  be  the  centre  of  all  their  movements. 
They  then  partook  of  the  Sacrament  of  the 
Lord's  Supper,  to  remind  them  of  the  price  at 
which  their  happiness  had  been  procured ;  the 
crucifix  was  held  out  for  them  to  kiss,  to  signify 
that,  in  all  the  relationships  of  life,  love  for 
Christ  must  be  supreme  ;  then,  to  show  that 
wedded  love  is  also  sacred,  and  a  thing  of  which 
no  one  need  be  ashamed,  before  the  whole  con- 
gregation they  kissed  each  other  ;  and  so  the 
ceremony  was  complete. 


LIFE    IN   A   SIBERIAN   VILLAGE     81 

The  happy  pair  now  left  the  church,  and, 
amid  the  ringing  of  the  bells  and  the  congratu- 
lations of  the  people,  went  down  to  their  little 
cottage  by  the  lake,  to  spend,  let  us  hope,  a 
lifelong  honeymoon. 

I  strolled  out  towards  the  open  country  after 
the  wedding,  infected  naturally  enough  with  the 
good-humour  of  the  occasion,  and  one's  nature 
responded  cheerfully  to  the  inspiring  influence 
of  the  sunshine  and  the  bracing  Siberian  air. 
But  though  the  blue  expanse  above  me  was 
unsullied,  there  was  a  bank  of  cumulus  on  the 
horizon.  It  is  seldom  at  this  season  that  one 
sees  a  sky  absolutely  cloudless  ;  and  social 
life,  even  in  remote  Siberian  villages,  seems 
very  much  the  same. 

A  man  ran  out  of  a  cottage  I  had  just  passed, 
and  asked  me  if  I  would  oblige  him  by  coming 
to  see  his  son  ;  and  as  the  look  upon  his  face 
told  me  that  the  case  was  an  urgent  one,  I 
followed  him  at  once. 

The  son  referred  to  was  a  tall,  well-built  youth, 
within  a  few  weeks  of  twenty  years  of  age,  and 
the  eldest  child  of  the  family.  He  had  been  to 
the  forest  for  a  load  of  wood,  and  had  returned 
with  it  to  the  village,  when  the  horse  became 
restive  at  the  gate,  and,  in  the  effort  to  con- 
trol him,  by  a  sudden  jerk  a  gun  which  the 
young  man  had  with  him  in  the  cart  went  off, 

6 


82  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

inflicting  most  serious  injury  upon  his  left  arm 
and  hand. 

The  mother — a  kind  but  energetic-looking 
woman,  nearly  fifty  years  of  age,  and  with  hair 
already  grey — had  been  watching  the  wedding 
in  the  church,  wondering  when  she  would  have 
the  privilege  of  witnessing  a  similar  ceremony 
for  her  son.  She  returned  just  in  time  to  see 
him  carried  wounded  into  the  liouse. 

A  few  neighbours  had  come  in  to  help  or  to 
console,  but  they  knew  neither  what  to  do  nor 
what  to  say,  and  from  the  low  doorway  of  the 
room,  before  I  entered,  I  could  see  them  and 
the  members  of  the  family  standing  in  speechless 
horror,  as  if  watching  tlie  approach  of  some 
di'eadful  apparition.  And  death  was  not  very 
far  away  ;  his  shadow  was  already  creeping 
over  the  young  man's  face. 

A  sudden  eagerness  of  hope  ht  up  the  face 
of  the  mother  when  she  saw  me,  and  with  one 
authoritative  word  she  swept  the  bystanders 
aside  that  I  might  not  be  impeded  in  my  Avork. 
The  wounded  arteries  being  secured,  life  soon 
began  again  to  struggle  for  the  mastery,  and 
the  threatening  spectre,  seeing  he  was  baffled, 
fled. 

It  seemed  almost  impossible  to  preserve  the 
hand,  but  an  attempt  to  do  so  was  worth  the 
while  ;    so  with  stitches  and  bandages,  and  such 


LIFE    IN    A   SIBERIAN    VILLAGE     83 

splints  and  dressings  as  could  be  manufactured 
on  the  spot,  the  torn  and  contorted  tissues 
were  replaced  in  their  position,  and,  thanks 
to  the  mother's  care  and  the  splendid  health  of 
the  young  man,  both  life  and  limb  were  saved. 

I  had  no  trouble  after  this  in  getting  eggs  and 
milk  in  Kamenrubeloff  ;  and  when  I  set  out 
again  on  my  journey,  the  whole  family  came  to 
say  farewell.  The  young  man  still  had  his  arm 
in  a  sling,  but  otherwise  seemed  little  the  worse 
for  his  accident  ;  the  mother  got  far  beyond 
my  depth  in  Russian  speech,  but  the  look  upon 
her  face  was  my  interpreter  ;  and  the  father, 
though  embarrassed  in  his  manner,  and  less  fluent 
than  his  wife,  insisted  upon  taking  me  and  my 
baggage  to  the  steamer  wharf,  two  or  three 
miles  from  the  villa,ge,  with  his  own  horse  and 
cart. 


CHAPTER    VII 

BY   STEAMER   J'ROM   KHAISTKA   TO    THE    AMOOR 

The  clouds  which  I  had  seen  gathering  on  the 
horizon  brought  a  change  of  weather.  A  strong 
south  wind  began  to  blow,  and  by  its  warmth 
and  vehemence,  as  it  swept  over  the  surface  of 
Lake  Khanka,  speedily  broke  up  the  ice,  and 
drove  it  in  piled-up  masses  northward,  leaving 
the  southern  half  of  that  great  sheet  of  water 
clear.  As  soon  as  the  course  was  open,  a  steamer 
came  over  from  the  other  side  ;  and  as  several 
people  had  been  waiting  for  it  in  the  village  for 
days  and  weeks,  in  a  few  hours  it  had  booked 
its  full  complement  of  passengers,  and  was 
ready  to  start  again. 

We  found  the  steamer  waiting  for  us  at  a 
roughly-constructed  wooden  jetty  a  few  miles 
from  the  village.  It  was  a  small  craft,  little 
more,  indeed,  than  a  steam-launch,  and  could 
barely  accommodate  the  cabin  passengers  ;  those, 
therefore,  who  had  deck  tickets — soldiers,  poor 
emigrants,   and   a   few   Koreans   and  Chinese — 

84 


FROM  KHANKA  TO  THE  AMOOR  85 

were  placed,  with  the  cargo,  on  a  big  lumbering 
barge,  absurdly  named  the  Little  Son,  and  which 
was  towed  astern  of  us  by  a  long  hawser. 

We  loosed  from  our  moorings  an  hour  or 
two  after  dawn  on  a  murky,  miserable  morning, 
and  the  outlook  from  our  deck  was  a  very  dreary 
one.  The  few  trees  on  the  banks  were  leafless, 
the  surface  of  the  lake  to  the  northward  was 
a  mass  of  ice,  and  over  all  rested  a  cold  depress- 
ing haze.  There  were  no  other  signs  of  naviga- 
tion, and  no  boats  of  any  kind  in  sight  except  our 
steamer  and  its  barge.  As  the  lake  was  forty 
miles  across  we  could  not  see  the  other  side, 
and  the  expanse  of  water  which  stretched  away 
before  us  might  have  been  mistaken  for  the 
sea  ;  all  the  more  so  now  because  of  the  big 
waves  which  the  wind  had  beaten  up  upon  its 
surface,  and  which  made  our  Uttle  steamer  roll 
and  pitch  in  a  very  uncomfortable  way. 

All  day  long  we  were  tossing  on  the  lake,  and 
for  several  hours  were  out  of  sight  of  land ; 
but  in  the  afternoon,  against  the  grey,  cloud- 
covered  sky,  the  farther  shore  appeared — a  long, 
low  bank,  sentineUed  by  a  few  ragged,  weather- 
beaten  trees. 

In  trying  to  enter  the  Sungacha  River,  the 
principal  outlet  of  the  lake,  we  ran  aground, 
and  our  Uttle  steamer  had  to  be  fairly  lifted 
again  into  deep  water  by  the  leverage  of  long 


86  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

spars  thrust  under  her  keel  from  the  barge. 
This  so  delayed  us  that  it  was  nearly  dark  when 
we  found  our  way  into  the  river,  and  were  able 
to  anchor  for  the  night. 

We  started  again  at  daybreak,  and  it  was 
astonishing  to  find  that  the  river  we  were  navi- 
gating was  so  small.  Throughout  its  course 
of  350  miles,  from  the  Khanka  Lake  to  its  con- 
fluence with  the  Usuri,  the  Sungacha  is  seldom 
more  than  a  hundred  feet  wide  ;  and  it  runs 
such  a  winding  course  that  sometimes  we  had 
turned  round  a  sudden  bend,  and  were  steaming 
westward,  while  our  barge,  which  we  could  see 
through  the  shrubbery,  abreast  of  us,  was  still 
running  in  the  opposite  direction.  But  the  Httle 
river  has  a  deep  channel,  and  flows  through  a 
soft  moorland  country,  so  there  was  Uttle  fear  of 
grounding  ;  and  if  we  did  happen  to  run  against 
the  bank,  it  was  the  bank  which  suffered  for  it, 
and  not  the  steamer. 

Clumps  of  willow  just  breaking  into  leaf, 
and  closely  clustered  to  the  water's  edge,  fringed 
the  river  on  either  side  ;  and  it  was  evidently 
a  favourite  haunt  of  water-fowl,  for  ducks, 
often  in  great  flocks,  flew  up  before  our  steamer 
at  every  turn.  Some  of  them  did  not  fly  fast 
enough,  and  so  were  shot  by  an  alert  sportsman 
at  our  bow.  They  were  picked  up  by  a  long- 
handled  landing-net,  and  passed  over  to  the  cook. 


FROM  KHANKA  TO  THE  AMOOR  87 

On  all  Siberian  steamers  wood  is  used  for 
fuel,  and,  as  this  burns  much  more  rapidly  than 
coal,  we  had  to  stop  at  least  once  every  day  to 
fill  our  bunkers.  This  gave  us  an  opportunity 
to  ramble  on  the  bank,  and  look  more  closely 
at  the  country,  which,  from  its  appearance  out- 
side the  settlements,  might  never  have  been 
trodden  by  the  foot  of  man.  At  intervals  of 
from  fifteen  to  twenty  miles  there  were  the  post- 
horse  stations  to  supply  teams  for  sledges  in 
the  winter ;  at  longer  distances  apart  there 
were  the  wood-stations  to  provide  fuel  for  the 
steamers  ;  and  the  people  at  these  stations — 
a  few  yemschiks  and  wood-cutters — seemed  to 
be  the  sole  inhabitants.  But  the  spring  had 
come,  and  there  was  plenty  of  life  about  us  in 
the  bursting  leaf-buds  on  the  trees  and  the  young 
grass  covering  the  earth  ;  and  when  I  heard 
the  lark  singing  as  he  soared,  and  saw  the  plovers 
tumble  and  heard  their  familiar  cry,  I  almost 
forgot  I  was  in  such  a  solitary  country  and  so 
far  from  home. 

There  were  about  a  dozen  other  passengers 
upon  the  steamer,  all  of  whom  were  Russian 
Government  officials  either  in  civil  or  military 
service.  Five  of  them  were  quartered  with  me 
in  the  after-cabin — a  small  apartment  measur- 
ing fourteen  feet  by  ten.  Here  we  lived  and 
feasted,    and    here,    on    the    settee    around    tha 


88  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

table,  we  had  to  sleep  at  night,  for  there  were 
no  berths  or  separate  cabuis. 

The  steamer  was  moored  agamst  the  bank 
at  dark  ;  and  as  there  was  not  population  enough 
in  the  neighbourhood  to  encourage  thieves,  and 
no  other  boat  upon  the  river,  we  had  no  need 
of  lights  or  watchmen,  so  towards  midnight 
every  lamp  upon  the  steamer  was  put  out,  and 
everybody  went  to  bed.  The  stillness  and 
darkness  ought  to  have  helped  us  to  slumber 
soundly,  but  there  seemed  to  be  always  some 
one  keeping  vigil,  and,  at  whatever  hour  of 
night  I  happened  to  awake,  it  was  seldom  that 
the  black  canopy  around  me  was  not  relieved 
by  one  little  Mars-like  star  low  down  on  the 
horizon,  declaring  itself  at  length,  by  some 
erratic  movement,  to  be  nothing  but  the  burn- 
ing tip  of  a  cigarette. 

Very  polite  are  these  Russian  officers,  but, 
though  we  slept  in  the  same  room,  we  rose  in 
the  mornmg  and  put  on  our  clothes  without  a 
single  word  to  one  another  ;  and  it  was  not 
Until  some  water  had  been  poured  upon  our 
hands  by  a  sailor,  and  our  toilet  was  complete, 
that  we  reassembled  in  the  cabin,  shook  hands 
all  round,  and  wished  each  other  good-morning. 

According  to  Russian  custom  we  had  two 
substantial  meals  a  day — a  dinner  of  three  courses 
at  noon,  and  a  supper  of  one  savoury  dish  at 


FROM  KHANKA  TO  THE  AMOOR  89 

eight  in  the  evening  ;  also  two  lighter  meals  of 
tea  and  white  bread  and  rusks,  at  seven  in  the 
morning  and  four  in  the  afternoon.  We  had 
no  butter  with  our  bread — Russians  are  accus- 
tomed to  eat  it  dry  ;  and  in  Eastern  and  Central 
Siberia,  though  milk  and  curds  and  clotted 
cream  are  plentiful,  butter  and  cheese  are  hardly 
known. 

The  ordinary  bread  used  by  the  people  is  the 
black  bread  already  described.  It  always  has 
an  acid  taste,  and  a  very  small  slice  of  it  sufficed 
for  me  ;  but  black  bread  with  a  little  salt  on  it 
is  very  much  relished  by  all  classes  of  Russians. 
Wheaten  bread  in  Siberia  is  a  luxury  only  rarely 
to  be  obtained, — and  that  made  of  fine  white 
flour  is  rarer  still  ;  it  is  known  as  French  bread, 
and  the  people  regard  it  very  much  as  the  English 
regard  sponge-cake. 

What  tea-drinkers  these  Russians  are  !  A 
Chinaman  in  Kamenrubeloff  told  me  that  one 
of  his  principal  difficulties  in  associating  with 
the  people  of  this  country  was  his  inability  to 
drink  such  quantities  of  tea.  The  Siberian 
peasantry  use  what  is  called  '  brick- tea,' — 
Kerpichni  chai — which  is  simply  pure  tea-dust 
pressed  by  hydraulic  power  into  slabs  for  con- 
venience of  transport.  It  is  used  in  some  parts 
of  Siberia  instead  of  money  as  a  medium  of 
exchange,  and  the  value  of  a  horse  or  cow  or 


90  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

plot  of  land  is  estimated  at  so  many  bricks 
of  tea.  To  prepare  a  drink  of  it,  a  piece  is  cut 
off  with  an  axe  and  boiled  for  at  least  a  quarter 
of  an  hour  ;  simple  infusion  will  not  suffice  to 
separate  the  hard-pressed  particles. 

It  is  only  the  poorer  classes  who  habitually 
use  this  kind  of  tea,  the  dried  leaf  in  its  usual 
form  being  preferred  by  others.  It  is  sometimes 
said  that  the  best  tea  produced  in  China  goes 
to  Russia,  but  this  is  a  mistake.  The  finest 
qualities  of  Chinese  tea,  which  always  yield  a 
pale  infusion,  and  are  sold  in  native  tea-shops 
at  various  prices,  rising  to  upwards  of  five  pounds 
sterling  per  pound  avoirdupois,  are  entirely 
consumed  by  the  Chinese  ;  but  of  the  coarser 
kinds,  prepared  expressly  for  foreign  markets, 
and  which  mostly  yield  a  dark  infusion,  probably 
the  best  is  that  which  is  carried  overland  through 
Siberia  to  Russia. 

The  tea  the  Russians  drink  is  generally  well 
diluted.  A  strong  infusion  having  been  made 
in  a  teapot,  a  small  quantity  (one  or  two  table- 
spoonfuls)  is  poured  into  a  half-pint  goblet, 
which  is  then  filled  with  boiling  water  from  the 
samovar.  A  slice  of  lemon  added  is  rightly 
considered  an  improvement,  but  milk  or  cream 
is  never  put  in  Russian  tea  ;  nor  is  it  ever  sweet- 
ened, though  a  lump  of  sugar  is  frequently 
placed  on  the  table  beside  the  tea-glass,  and  a 


FROM  KHANKA  TO  THE  AMOOR  91 

small  piece  is  bitten  off  it  before  each  drink. 
If  four  or  five  Russians  sit  round  a  samovar  of 
gallon  size,  they  seldom  leave  off  di'inking  until 
the  samovar  is  dry. 

But  tea  is  not  the  only  beverage  of  the  Russians 
in  Siberia,  nor  by  any  means  the  strongest, 
and,  great  as  is  the  quantity  they  drink,  it  is 
not  easy  to  decide  which  the  average  Russian 
drinks  most  of — tea  or  vodka. 

Two  days  after  entering  the  Sungacha  River, 
at  one  of  the  wood  stations,  a  civil  engineer  in 
Government  uniform  wished  to  take  a  passage 
on  our  steamer  ;  but  he  was  so  noisily  and 
helplessly  drunk  that  our  captain  had  him 
placed  with  the  steerage  passengers  on  the 
barge.  He  had  a  big  bold  Siberian  peasant 
woman  with  him,  who  was  scolding  him  roundly. 
She  was  his  '  Siberian  wife.' 

A  considerable  number  of  the  Government 
officials  appointed  to  Eastern  Siberia  leave  their 
wives  at  home,  not  caring  to  subject  them  to 
the  hardships  of  life  and  travel  in  this  wild 
country.  The  term  of  service  here  is  three  years, 
which  counts  for  promotion  as  the  equivalent 
of  five  elsewhere,  and  for  this  period  it  is  usual 
for  these  officials  to  engage  a  peasant  woman 
of  the  country  as  housekeeper  and  wife.  There 
is  no  attempt  at  concealment,  nor  does  such 
proceeding  involve  any  reflection  whatsoever  on 


92  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

a  man's  respectability.  The  woman  is  not 
deceived  ;  she  fully  understands  the  temporary 
nature  of  the  relationship,  and  is  generally 
faithful  to  it. 

Whether  or  not  such  a  man  desires  from  his 
wife  in  Europe  a  constancy  greater  than  his 
own,  he  has  usually  sufficient  sense  of  justice 
not  to  insist  upon  it,  and  an  act  of  unfaithfulness 
which  on  the  part  of  a  concubine  would  inevit- 
ably lead  a  man  to  a  duel  with  his  rival,  would 
on  the  part  of  a  lawful  wife  be  quietly  ignored. 

The  civil  engineer  was  sober  enough  by  the 
next  morning,  and  was  admitted  to  the  cabin 
of  our  steamer.  I  was  surprised  to  find  him 
such  a  modest,  gentlemanly,  and  cultured  man. 
He  held  an  important  post  in  connexion  with 
the  construction  of  the  Siberian  railway  ;  be- 
longed to  a  good  family  in  St.  Petersburg  ;  had 
read  extensively ;  and  spoke  English  without 
suspicion  of  an  accent.  He  professed  to  be  of 
a  decidedly  religious  turn,  and  told  me  that  in 
this  lonely  region,  where  he  was  seldom  within 
reach  of  a  church,  the  study  of  the  Scriptures 
was  his  principal  relaxation  and  delight.  I  did 
not  allude  to  the  disgraceful  condition  in  which 
I  saw  him  on  the  previous  day,  though  doing 
so  would  not,  I  think,  have  seriously  offended 
him.  In  his  judgement,  drunkenness,  unless  too 
frequently  repeated,  was  at  worst  but  a  pardon- 


FROM  KHANKA  TO  THE  AMOOR  93 

able  indiscretion.  But  he  seemed  to  have  no 
idea  that  he  himself  had  been  drunk  at  all. 

'  I  had  a  hard  day  yesterday,'  he  said,  '  sur- 
veying a  stretch  of  marshland,  and  from  dawn 
to  noon  was  up  to  my  waist  in  mud.  To  save 
myself  from  getting  fever,  I  went  home  and 
drank  a  pint  of  strong  spirit,  but  I  suppose  I 
did  not  drink  enough,  for  the  fever  came  on  in 
spite  of  it,  and  was  so  bad  when  I  reached  the 
steamer  that  the  captain  would  not  let  me 
come  on  board.  How  this  marsh  fever  does 
upset  a  man  !  ' 

At  the  confluence  of  the  Sungacha  and  Usuri 
Rivers  we  were  transferred  to  another  steamer, 
somewhat  larger  than  the  first,  but  with  similar 
arrangements  and  accommodation.  For  the 
next  five  hundred  miles  our  course  lay  down 
the  latter  river,  which,  with  many  windings  east 
and  west,  makes  its  way  northward  to  the  Amoor. 
The  Usuri  is  a  much  larger  river  than  the  Sun- 
gacha, and  its  water  is  clearer,  but  it  flows 
through  a  similarly  lonely  and  uncultivated 
country.  Large  fish  darted  from  the  bows  of 
our  steamer,  and  aquatic  birds  were  still  abun- 
dant. Flocks  of  ducks  and  geese  frequently  flew 
past  us  ;  and  the  inlets  of  the  river  and  lagoon- 
like pools,  of  which  we  caught  glimpses  through 
the  trees  and  shrubbery  which  fringed  the 
river-bank,  appeared  to  be  covered  with  these 


94  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

and  other  kinds  of  waterfowl.  At  one  of  the 
wood-stations  we  heard  of  the  depredations  of 
a  tiger.  It  had  not  only  made  havoc  among 
the  horses,  but  quite  recently  had  killed  two 
men.  The  district  could  ill  afford  this  loss,  for 
its  human  population  is  extremely  small,  the 
only  signs  of  Western  immigration  being  a  few 
widely  severed  settlements  of  Cossack  wood- 
cutters. 

In  addition  to  these  Russian  settlers,  I  saw 
at  several  wood-stations  some  interesting  speci- 
mens of  aboriginal  tribes.  A  week  or  two  later, 
on  the  banks  of  the  Amoor,  I  saw  them  more 
frequently.  Called  by  various  names — Goldi, 
Orotchis,  or  Manegrs — according  to  the  locality 
in  which  they  settle,  and  some  peculiarities  of 
life,  the  natives  of  this  region  are  all  branches 
of  the  Tungusian  tribe  of  Mongols,  and  are 
known  to  the  Chinese  by  the  name  Yii-'pi  ta-tsz, 
the  meaning  of  which  is  roughly  represented  by 
the  European  designation,  '  Fish-skin  Tartars.'' 

A  queer-looking  little  people  they  are,  with 
their  characteristically  Mongolian  features — 
black  hair  and  eyes,  flat  flabby  noses,  broad 
faces  and  prominent  cheek-bones  ;  and  are  so 
dwarfish  in  stature  that  a  man  of  5  feet  4  inches 
and  a  woman  of  4  feet  10  inches  are  considered 
tall. 

Their  dwellings  are  huts  of  birch-bark  ;    and 


FROM  KHANKA  TO  THE  AMOOR  95 

half  a  dozen  of  them,  sheltering  as  many  families, 
and  fifty  or  sixty  dogs,  make  a  Goldi  or  Oro- 
tchi  village.  These  rude  huts,  though  effective 
enough  in  protecting  from  the  rain  and  snow, 
are  too  full  of  apertures  to  keep  out  the  wind 
and  cold  ;  and,  though  the  peoj)le  have  plenty 
of  bear  and  reindeer  skins  to  cover  them,  it  is 
not  surprising  to  find  that  painful  rheumatic 
affections  are  very  prevalent  among  them. 

They  appear  to  be  as  free  as  the  Chinese 
from  squeamishness  with  regard  to  what  they 
eat,  anything  that  will  answer  the  purposes  of 
food  being,  in  an  emergency,  acceptable  ;  but 
bear's  flesh  is  their  greatest  luxury,  and  fish 
their  most  usual  fare. 

During  the  few  months  of  their  brief  summer 
large  quantities  of  fish  are  caught  and  dried 
for  winter  use.  This  dried  fish,  or  yukola,  is 
often  ground  into  a  sort  of  meal,  which  can  be 
used  instead  of  flour  for  making  cakes.  A 
most  important  commodity  is  yukola,  both  for 
man  and  beast  ;  for  towards  the  end  of  winter, 
when  supplies  of  hay  and  barley  are  exhausted, 
even  such  strict  vegetarians  as  cows  and  horses 
become  carnivorous,  and  are  glad  of  a  good 
feed  of  fish-meal. 

Most  of  the  fish  are  caught  in  nets,  but  the 
children  of  the  village  are  expected  to  contribute 
to  the  store  with  rod  and  line,  and  youngsters 


96  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

of  eight  or  ten  years  old  become  skilful  enough 
to  land  a  fish  of  fifteen  pounds.  The  twine  of 
which  the  nets  are  made  is  prepared  from  the 
stalks  of  nettles  which,  in  the  summer-time,  are 
found  growing  wild  near  every  settlement. 
Before  a  net  is  used,  it  is  boiled  in  reindeer  blood 
to  make  it  durable. 

But  it  is  not  merely  as  food  that  fish  are  in 
such  requisition,  for  the  skins  of  fish  are  used 
not  only  to  mend  their  houses,  but  even  to  make 
their  clothes  ;  and  this  is  why  these  people 
have  received  the  name  of  '  Fish-skin  Tartars.' 
The  dried  fish-skin  is  first  crumpled  up  by  the 
hands  into  a  ball,  then  rolled  and  pounded  in 
a  sort  of  wooden  mortar,  and  when  it  has 
acquired  the  necessary  suppleness  it  is  sewn  to- 
gether and  made  up  into  trousers,  tunics,  aprons, 
and  shoes,  the  soles  of  the  latter  being  usually 
strengthened  by  a  piece  of  reindeer  hide. 

The  garments  of  most  of  the  men  I  saw 
appeared  to  be  made  of  salmon-skin  ;  but  fashion- 
able ladies  of  the  tribe  selected,  for  their  own 
and  their  children's  clothing,  skins  with  pretty 
stripes  and  markings  ;  and  after  seeing  one  of 
these  Orotchi  nymphs  in  full  fish-skin  dress,  if 
her  face  had  only  been  a  little  prettier,  I  think 
I  should  henceforth  have  ceased  to  regard  the 
mermaid  as  a  myth. 

These   people   have   no   literature   or   written 


FROM  KHANKA  TO  THE  AMOOR  97 

language,  and  no  wealth  of  historical  tradition. 
They  have  a  keen  memory  for  landmarks,  and 
can  retrace  their  steps  with  unerring  accuracy 
after  a  week's  journey  in  the  trackless  forest ; 
but  they  can  remember  little  else,  and  a  woman 
is  seldom  able  to  keep  count  of  her  children's 
age  beyond  five  years. 

Their  family  life  is  simple.  Girls  are  usually 
married  at  from  fifteen  to  sixteen,  and  boys  at 
from  eighteen  to  twenty  years  of  age.  As  no 
females  remain  unmarried  beyond  girlhood,  the 
range  of  selection  for  a  man  who  desires  a  wife 
is  a  narrow  one  ;  but,  having  made  his  choice, 
he  need  have  no  fear  of  a  refusal  if  he  is  able 
to  pay  to  the  girl's  father  the  stipulated  price, 
which  is  usually  fifty  sable-skins,  a  few  pieces 
of  silk,  and  a  kettle. 

There  is  no  wilful  polygamy  among  the  Fish- 
skin  Tartars,  but,  as  all  married  women  are 
entailed,  involuntary  polygamy  is  by  no  means 
rare.  When  a  man  dies,  his  widow  becomes 
the  wife  of  his  next  elder  or  younger  brother, 
or,  if  he  has  no  brother,  of  his  nearest  male 
relative  ;  and  the  survivor  of  several  brothers 
may  have  so  many  wives  thus  added  to  his  own, 
that,  however  angelic  they  may  be,  he  finds 
his  little  birch-bark  hut  uncomfortably  crowded. 

The  Orotchis  are  proud  of  their  children,  and 
treat  them  just  as  kindly  whether  they  are  girls 

7 


98  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

or  boys.  Babies  are  put  to  lie  in  birch-bark 
cradles,  padded  with  moss  and  shavings,  and 
which  are  suspended  from  the  roof  of  the  hut. 
Dangling  over  them,  to  amuse  the  child,  and 
rattling  as  the  cradles  swing,  are  strings  of 
teeth  and  claws  of  various  wild  animals.  When 
the  infant  is  a  few  months  old  a  fish's  head  is 
given  it  to  suck  and  cut  its  teeth  upon,  and 
in  a  little  while  it  is  ready  for  its  first  suit  of 
fish-skin  clothes. 

The  religion  of  these  tribes  is  a  form  of  the 
Shamanism  which  once  prevailed  throughout 
Siberia,  and  was  the  religion  of  the  ancestors 
of  the  modern  Turks  before  they  became  Moham- 
medans. They  recognize  a  supreme  divinity, 
whom  they  call  Anduri ;  and  two  subordinate 
ones — Kamtchanga,  the  god  of  the  dry  land, 
and  Yemu,  the  god  of  the  sea. 

It  is  believed  that  the  two  latter  gods  may, 
on  special  occasions,  make  themselves  manifest 
in  material  form  to  men  ;  but  the  supreme  god, 
Anduri,  remains  always  invisible,  though  he 
may,  to  the  Shaman,  directly  reveal  his  will. 

The  Shaman  in  an  Orotchi  settlement  is  a 
sort  of  wizard  priest,  corresponding  to  the  medi- 
cine-men of  African  and  Polynesian  tribes.  He 
is  consulted  by  the  people  with  a  view  to  finding 
lost  articles,  avoiding  some  threatened  disaster, 
or   foretelling   the    issue    of   some    contemplated 


FROM  KHANKA  TO  THE  AMOOR  99 

enterprise,  but  especially  to  drive  away  disease. 
His  power  to  help  is  supposed  to  depend  upon 
some  special  revelation  from  Anduri,  to  receive 
which  the  Shaman  works  himself  into  a  frenzy,, 
dances  about  frantically,  shouts,  screams,  and' 
beats  himself  until  he  falls  exhausted  to  the 
ground.  In  the  dream  which  follows,  Anduri 
is  supposed  to  supply  the  necessary  information, 
and  on  the  morrow  the  Shaman  communicates 
it  to  his  client. 

If  the  case  be  medical,  the  remedy  usually 
prescribed  is  the  construction  of  a  rough  wooden 
image  of  a  wild  beast  or  a  man,  its  suspension 
from  a  tree  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Sha- 
man's hut,  and  liberal  supplies  of  oil  and  yukola 
to  be  placed  before  the  image  every  evening, 
for  it  to  feed  upon  in  the  darkness  of  the  night. 
In  the  morning  the  bowls  are  always  found 
empty,  ready  for  a  fresh  supply.  If  recovery 
ensues,  it  is  believed  that  the  evil  spirit  of  the 
disease  has  gone  out  of  the  patient  into  the 
wooden  image,  as  the  devils  from  the  maniac  at 
Gadara  went  into  the  herd  of  swine.  If  the 
sufferer  dies,  the  Shaman,  of  course,  declares 
that  his  directions  with  regard  to  the  construc- 
tion of  the  image  and  its  nourishment  have 
not  been  duly  carried  out. 

These  people  believe  that  the  soul  is  immortal, 
and   that   it   remains   in   its    old   haunts    for   a 


100  ACROSS   SIBERIA 

fortnight  after  death  ;  during  which  period, 
therefore,  the  place  of  the  deceased  is  always  left 
vacant  in  the  family  circle,  and  at  meal-times 
the  bowl  and  chop-sticks  are  placed  before  it. 
The  corpse  is  laid  in  a  pine-wood  coffin,  which 
is  not  buried,  but  fixed  on  a  wooden  stand  a 
few  feet  above  the  ground,  and  a  small  birch- 
bark  hut  is  constructed  over  it.  Sepulture  is 
considered  so  important,  that  when  the  body  of 
a  relative  who  has  been  drowned  cannot  be 
recovered,  a  rough  wooden  image  of  him  is  coffined 
and  entombed  instead. 

The  only  public  religious  festival  now  ob- 
served among  these  people  is  the  '  Bear  Feast,' 
which  usually  takes  place  in  the  middle  of  winter, 
as  an  expression  of  gratitude  for  success  in  hunt- 
ing or  for  some  other  benefit  received.  The 
ceremony  consists  in  leading  round  from  hut 
to  hut  a  three-year-old  bear,  which  has  been 
caught  and  fattened  for  the  purpose.  The 
bear  is  decked  with  ribbons  and  ornaments, 
and  is  kept  under  control  by  ropes  attached  to 
its  body,  neck,  and  forepaws,  and  held  tight 
in  opposite  directions.  At  each  hut  visited  a 
feast  is  provided  for  both  bear  and  people  ;  and 
at  the  end  of  the  third  day  the  animal  is  tied 
to  a  tree,  and  shot  at  -udth  bows  and  arrows  by 
the  best  marksmen  of  the  tribe.  If  they  fail 
to  kill  it  at  seventy  yards,  they  come  gradually 


FROM  KHANKA  TO  THE  AMOOR  101 

nearer  until  they  succeed.  When  the  bear  is 
dead,  pine-log  fires  are  kindled,  the  flesh  is  cut 
up  and  roasted,  and  all  the  people  gather  round 
and  feast  until  there  is  nothing  left. 

The  favourite  occupation  of  the  Orotchis  is 
sable-hunting,  and  almost  all  the  adult  male 
population  is  engaged  in  it  from  the  end  of 
September  to  the  beginning  of  May.  Far  away 
to  the  eastward,  as  we  steamed  down  the  Usuri, 
we  could  see  long  ranges  of  mountains.  They 
are  very  imperfectly  known  to  European  geog- 
raphers, but  are  generally  grouped  together 
under  the  name  Sikhotaahn.  Among  the  wild 
jungles  and  almost  impenetrable  forests  which 
cover  this  region  is  the  Orotchis'  hunting-ground. 

Each  Orotchi  selects  his  own  district,  and 
goes  out  to  the  hunt  alone.  As  soon  as  he  reaches 
the  confines  of  the  forest,  he  stops  to  ask  the 
favour  of  the  gods  upon  his  enterprise.  To 
Anduri,  the  Supreme,  whom  the  poor  hunter 
regards  as  too  great  to  need  or  to  accept  an  offer- 
ing, he  simply  prays  ;  but  he  seeks  to  propitiate 
Kamtchanga,  the  god  of  the  forest,  by  a  gift 
of  fish-meal  cakes.  Then  he  continues  his 
journey  until  he  comes  upon  a  stream,  when 
he  begins  at  once  to  ply  his  craft.  As  shot- 
holes  in  a  sable-skin  lessen  its  value,  the  shrewd 
hunter  tries  to  capture  the  animals  by  various 
kinds    of   snares.     Cutting    down   a   number   of 


!i02  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

pine  saplings,  he  proceeds  to  lay  them  across 
the  stream  at  intervals  of  a  dozen  or  more  yards, 
iiaving  first  fixed  in  the  centre  of  each  a  spring 
noose.  The  sables  trying  to  make  use  of  these 
saplings  as  bridges  in  crossing  from  one  bank 
to  the  other,  can  hardly  fail  to  get  the  slip-knot 
round  their  necks. 

"Wlien  the  stream  is  frozen  this  method  fails, 
for  the  sables  are  not  likely  to  try  the  saplings 
when,  on  the  ice,  they  can  cross  the  river  where 
they  like.  But  the  experienced  sable-hunter 
can  adapt  his  methods  to  the  altered  circum- 
stances, and,  watching  quietly  until  he  sees  a 
sable  run  into  a  hollow  tree,  he  quickly  adjusts 
a  net  over  the  opening,  and  then  drives  the 
frightened  sable  into  it  by  loud  shouting,  and 
by  beating  against  the  bark  with  a  club.  Other 
kinds  of  trap  and  snare  are  also  used  ;  and  the 
hunter  does  not  hesitate  to  shoot  a  sable  with 
a  small-bore  rifle  when  he  can  obtain  it  in  no 
other  way. 

Though  mainly  in  pursuit  of  sable,  he  has  ever 
a  keen  eye  for  other  marketable  spoil ;  and  fox, 
otter,  muskdeer,  wild  boar,  bear,  elk,  and  rein- 
deer often  reward  his  toil.  A  skilful  Orotohi 
hunter  will  secure  in  a  good  season  as  many  as 
seventy  sables,  thirty  foxes,  and  seventy-five 
head  of  other  game. 

These    native    Siberian    hunters    have    great 


FROM  KHANKA  TO  THE  AMOOR  103 

powers  of  endurance.  The  only  provision  they 
take  with  them  on  their  excursions  is  a  few 
pounds  of  fish-meal  cakes  and  a  piece  of  brick- 
tea.  In  addition  to  these  things  they  have 
a  kettle,  flint  and  steel,  rifle  and  ammunition, 
bows  and  arrows,  and  an  assortment  of  nets 
and  snares.  They  go  on  from  day  to  day,  plung- 
ing deeper  and  deeper  into  the  forest,  and  never 
think  of  turnincf  back  until  their  stock  of  victuals 
is  exhausted  ;  the  return  journey,  though  en- 
cumbered perhaps  with  half  a  hundredweight  of 
skins  in  addition  to  their  gear,  and  occupying 
the  best  part  of  a  week,  being  performed  by 
them  without  any  food  at  all. 

The  Orotchis  and  their  kindred  tribes  were 
once  very  numerous  in  this  region,  but  since 
the  advent  of  Europeans  their  numbers  have 
seriously  declined.  They  are  all  more  or  less 
the  victims  of  oppression — oppression  arising 
not  so  much  from  the  harshness  of  Russian  law 
as  from  the  irrepressible  cupidity  of  the  tax 
collector.  The  tribute  fixed  by  Government  is 
a  rouble  and  a  half  per  man,  to  be  paid  in  sable- 
skins,  but  the  collector  will  never  accept  the 
skins  at  more  than  a  third  of  their  market  value. 
In  the  interests  of  the  aborigines,  the  Govern- 
ment has  made  it  illegal  to  supply  them  with 
intoxicating  drink  ;  but  this  only  exposes  them 
to  new  exactions,   for  the  itinerant  Chinese   or 


104  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

Manchu  spirit-vendor  still  carries  the  forbidden 
poison  from  one  village  to  another,  and  demands 
an  extortionate  price  for  it  as  compensation  for 
the  risk  of  his  defiance  of  the  law.  In  this  and 
other  ways  the  conditions  of  their  Ufe  are  be- 
coming harder  and  more  impracticable  every 
year,  and  in  a  few  decades  the  race  will  be 
extinct.* 

A  little  after  dawn  one  morning,  about  a  week 
after  leaving  Khanka  Lake,  we  saw  ahead  of 
us  against  the  sky  a  great  mountain-bluff,  on 
its  western  side  rising  abruptly  from  the  river, 
but  continuous  to  the  eastward  with  a  low  range 
of  hills.  There  was  a  silver  streak  along  its 
summit,  and,  as  we  drew  nearer,  this  streak 
resolved  itself  into  a  line  of  low,  white-painted 
cottages — a  Siberian  village,  so  it  seemed  ;  but 
the  captain  of  our  steamer  told  us  that  it  was 
the  city  of  Khabarofka,  the  metropolis  of  the 
Maritime  and  Amoor  provinces  of  Siberia. 

The  Governor-General  of  these  provinces  re- 
sides here  ;  but  the  office  happened  to  be  vacant 
at  the  time  of  my  visit,  Baron  Korf,  the  last 
Governor-General,  having  died  a  few  months 
before.     His  son,  a  fine  young  Cossack  ofiicer, 

^  An  interesting  risume  of  facts  respecting  the  social  life 
of  the  Orotchis,  from  Margaritoff  and  other  Russian  writers, 
is  contained  in  a  paper  by  M.  F.  A.  Fraser,  published  in  tho 
Journal  of  tho  China  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society. 


FROM  KHANKA  TO  THE  AMOOR  105 

had  just  arrived  from  St.  Petersburg  to  take  his 
widowed  mother  home. 

Here  it  is  that  the  hunters  of  Far  Eastern 
Siberia  find  a  market  for  their  furs,  and  some- 
times more  than  twenty  thousand  pounds  worth 
of  sable-skins  alone  have  passed  through  the 
city  in  one  season.  It  will  be  a  busy  grain- 
mart  some  day,  for  around  it  are  tens  of  thou- 
sands of  acres  of  virgin  soil  waiting  only  for 
the  husbandmen. 

It  was  a  stiff  climb  to  the  top  of  the  great 
rocky  platform  on  which  the  city  stands,  and 
it  did  not,  on  a  nearer  view,  look  much  more 
like  a  city  than  when  I  saw  it  from  below — 
except  perhaps  in  size,  for  it  has  such  wide  streets, 
and  its  single-storied  wooden  houses  have  been 
built  so  far  apart,  that  when  Khabarofka  has 
a  population  of  100,000 — forty  or  fifty  times 
the  number  of  its  present  one — it  need  not  cover 
a  more  extensive  area  than  it  does  to-day. 

The  houses  look  neat  and  clean,  but  every- 
thing else  is  in  the  rough.  Some  planking  has 
been  laid  down  on  the  side-walk,  but  there  has 
been  no  metalling  of  the  streets,  which  are  simply 
enclosed  portions  of  the  moor.  The  ground  in 
the  centre  has  been  broken  up  by  the  droskies, 
but  on  either  side  of  the  track  grass  was  growing, 
and  a  few  wild  flowers,  and  I  suppose  it  was 
the  sense  of  loneliness  which  made  one's  heart 


106  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

swell  so  at  finding  among  them  a  cluster  of  homely 
dandelions. 

The  citj''  has,  in  addition  to  a  couple  of  small 
churches,  a  fine  new  cathedral.  It  is  hexagonal 
in  shape,  and  has  five  towers,  each  covered  with 
a  light  green  cupola,  and  sui mounted  by  a  gilded 
cross. 

The  cathedral  stands  away  from  the  houses 
on  the  western  extremity  of  the  rocky  platform, 
which  is  also  its  highest  point,  having  a  fall 
to  the  river,  almost  precipitous,  of  over  six 
hundred  feet.  The  situation  is  an  ideal  one,  it 
commands  such  an  extensive  prospect.  The  vast 
plains  which  spread  themselves  out  on  the  other 
side  of  the  river  are  part  of  the  Empire  of  China. 
The  rest  of  the  city  is  hidden  from  those  plains 
by  the  contour  of  the  bluff,  but  the  cathedral 
is  a  conspicuous  landmark,  and  anywhere  within 
a  score  of  miles  it  should  be  plainly  visible. 

Old  Cathay  is  here  brought  into  the  closest 
contact  with  Western  civilization.  The  Russian 
advance  has  been  checked  by  the  river,  but  only 
for  a  moment  ;  that  river  will  soon  be  crossed  ; 
and  if  Chinese  watchers  in  the  distance  are  aware 
of  the  power  which  is  invading  them,  and  can 
foresee  its  victory,  it  should  be  some  relief  to 
the  gloom  of  their  forebodings  to  see  in  the  van 
of  the  invading  force  a  Christian  church. 

The  civihzation  of  Russia  may  be  less  highly 


FROM  KHANKA  TO  THE  AMOOR  107 

developed  than  our  own,  but  it  is  very  far  ahead 
of  the  civilization  of  the  Chinese  ;  and  what 
is  spoken  of  as  Russian  encroachment  in  Eastern 
Asia  may  be  not  only  the  best  thing  for  the 
welfare  of  our  race,  but,  in  the  nature  of  things, 
inevitable.  The  healthy  tree  must  take  up 
and  assimilate  whatever  is  nutritious  in  the  de- 
caying vegetation  round  about  it ;  light  cannot 
co-exist  with  darkness,  nor  heat  wdth  cold  ; 
and  when  two  such  races  as  the  Russians  and 
Chinese  are  brought  so  close  together,  these 
claimants  of  the  future  and  dreamers  of  the 
past  cannot  both  be  masters  ;  sooner  or  later 
a  struggle  for  supremacy — not  of  necessity  by 
force  of  arms— ^must  arise,  and  in  that  struggle 
the  fittest  will  survive. 

I  was  sitting  alone  on  the  edge  of  the  ch£F, 
on  the  evening  after  my  arrival  in  the  city,  think- 
ing of  these  problems.  The  cathedral  was  at 
my  back,  far  below  me  was  the  river,  and  beyond 
it  the  Manchurian  plains,  bounded  in  the  far 
distance  by  a  low  range  of  hills,  behind  which 
the  sun  was  sinking  fast.  Suddenly  there  fell 
upon  my  ears  the  inspiring  strains  of  a  fine  mili- 
tary band.  The  players  were  hidden  from  me 
by  a  clump  of  trees,  but  the  beautiful  blending 
of  sweet  sounds  flowed  into  the  current  of  my 
thought  ;  and  as  the  waves  of  this  martial 
symphony  rose  and  fell,  challenge  and  defiance 


108  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

now  softening  into  pity  and  now  swelling  again 
into  exultation  and  triumph,  it  seemed  to  me 
like  the  march  music  of  that  Christian  civilization 
which  some  of  us  believe  is  destined  to  regenerate 
China  and  overspread  the  earth. 


CHAPTER   VIII 

UP   THE   AMOOR 

Winding  half-way  round  the  foot  of  the  Khab- 
arofka  bluff,  beneath  the  shadow  of  its  northern 
wall,  the  Usuri  River  meets  with  the  Amoor  ; 
and  thence,  in  united  strength,  the  two  con- 
fluent rivers  roll  down  towards  the  coast-range 
mountains  to  force  a  passage  through  them  to 
the  sea.  Our  way  to  Europe  lies  westward,  up 
the  stream  to  the  wild  table-lands,  where  the 
Amoor  musters  its  forces  for  the  sweep  it  makes 
through  these  lowland  plains.  It  is  indeed  a 
noble  river.  Here  at  Khabarofka,  nearly  eight 
hundred  miles  from  its  mouth,  it  is  half  a  mile 
in  width,  and  is  navigable  for  a  farther  distance 
of  twice  as  far  again. 

The  steamers  for  ascending  the  Amoor  are 
larger  and  more  comfortable  than  those  on  the 
Usuri ;  and  fortunately  I  had  not  long  to  wait 
for  one,  the  steamer  on  which  I  took  my  passage 
leaving  Khabarofka  the  day  after  that  of  my 
arrival. 

109 


110  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

There  were  eight  of  us  in  the  after-cabin,  and 
my  companions  were  a  set  of  good-natured, 
careless  young  men,  most  of  them  in  Govern- 
ment employ.  They  spent  the  whole  day  plajdng 
baccarat,  had  hardly  patience  enough  to  desist 
while  the  table  was  cleared  for  meals,  and  played 
far  on  into  the  night.  However  small  their 
stakes,  several  of  the  players  in  the  course  of 
a  few  days  lost  all  they  had.  When  this  hap- 
pened to  one,  he  slunk  from  the  table  and  went 
up  on  deck  ;  and  there  we  saw  him  sitting, 
hour  after  hour,  with  liis  elbows  on  his  knees 
and  his  chin  on  his  hands,  heedless  of  his 
fellow  passengers,  heedless  of  the  scenery  on 
the  banks,  heedless  even  of  the  dinner-bell,  and 
apparently  interested  only  in  one  little  portion 
of  the  deck,  at  wliich  he  continued  to  stare 
vacantly. 

We  all  live  and  sleep  in  the  one  cabin,  as  on 
the  two  previous  steamers  ;  but  on  neither  of 
them  was  the  discomfort  of  the  arrangement  so 
intrusive  as  it  is  on  this.  Our  gamblers  sat  up 
too  late  at  night  for  the  cabin  to  be  made  tidy 
after  they  were  asleep,  and,  v/hen  the  steward 
came  in  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  to  set 
the  breakfast,  he  found  the  table  littered  from 
one  end  to  the  other  with  pieces  of  bread,  tea- 
glasses,  vodka-bottles,  playing-cards,  candles, 
hats,  tooth-  and  hair-brushes,  towels,  soap,  shav- 


UP   THE   AMOOR  HI 

ing  apparatus,  books,  matches,  cigarette-ashes, 
and  perhaps  the  clothes  of  one  or  two  who  were 
not  yet  dressed. 

It  was  a  reUef  to  go  up  on  deck  and  look  at 
the  river,  or  even  at  the  virgin  forest  on  its  banks, 
for,  with  all  its  wild  luxuriance,  there  was  in  that 
tangled  mass  of  vegetation  no  suggestion  of  con- 
fusion. Masses  of  ice  were  floating  down  the 
river,  and  their  white,  gleaming  surface  was  all 
the  more  conspicuous,  because  the  water  of  the 
Amoor,  stained  with  pine  leaves,  is  of  a  dark- 
brown  colour,  like  that  of  a  peat-moss  stream. 
The  little  gullies  between  the  hills  were  filled 
with  compressed  snow,  moving  down  slowly, 
like  miniature  glaciers,  towards  the  river.  The 
banks,  which  rose  on  either  side  above  the  snow- 
filled  gorges,  wherever  clear  of  forest,  were  covered 
with  rhododendrons,  now  in  full  bloom  ;  the 
bright  red  patches  extending  downward  to  the 
green  willows  on  the  margin  of  the  river,  and 
upward  to  the  dark  pine-trees,  which  stood 
between  them  and  the  sky. 

Immense  shoals  of  salmon  were  making  their 
way  with  us  up  the  stream,  and  they  seemed  to 
think  so  little  of  the  long  voyage  from  the  sea — 
a  thousand  miles  and  more — which  they  had 
already  made,  and  of  the  still  longer  one  which 
yet  lay  before  them,  opposed  by  a  strong  adverse 
current,  that  in  sheer  exuberance  of  energy  they 


112  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

kept  leaping  their  whole  length  from  the  water 
as   they   went    along. 

Lovers  of  the  gentle  craft  could  hardly  wish 
for  better  fishing-waters  than  those  of  the  Amoor. 
On  its  banks,  beneath  the  cliffs  of  Khabarofka, 
anglers  were  always  to  be  seen  in  the  day-time, 
and,  though  provided  only  with  rough  home- 
made rods  and  lines,  every  one  who  had  been 
fishing  for  any  length  of  time  had  a  good  basket 
of  fish — pike,  bream,  carp,  perch,  with  several 
other  kinds  of  fish  not  found  in  British  waters. 
Salmon,  though  usually  caught  by  means  of 
nets,  are  frequently  taken  by  the  angler  with 
sunken  bait,  but  fly-fishing  in  this  part  of  Siberia 
appears  to  be  unknown.  Sturgeon  are  very 
plentiful,  and  one  of  20  lb.  could  be  bought  for 
about  a  shilling.  To  this  family  belongs  the 
Kalooga — the  largest  fish  in  the  Amoor.  It 
often  attains  a  weight  of  2,800  lb.,  the  head 
alone  of  such  a  fish  weighing  360  lb. 

Fish  are  so  abundant  in  this  river  that  even 
dogs  have  learned  to  catch  them,  and  in  walking 
on  the  bank  a  native  of  the  country  is  not  at  all 
surprised  to  find  one  of  these  canine  fishers, 
dripping  wet,  and  making  a  meal  of  a  fine  salmon 
which  he  has  seized  by  the  head  and  dragged 
out  of  the  water. 

At  noon,  on  the  fifth  day  of  our  voyage,  we 
arrived  at  Blagovestchensk,  a  town  whose  ap- 


UP  THE   AMOOR  113 

pearance  is  by  no  means  so  imposing  as  its  name. 
It  straggles  along  the  left  bank  of  the  Amoor 
for  several  miles,  but  its  wooden  houses  are  so 
small,  and  are  built  so  far  apart,  that  the  total 
population  cannot  much  exceed  twelve  thousand. 
There  are  hills  in  the  distance,  but  the  country 
in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  is  flat  and 
uninteresting,  and  there  is  nothing  to  attract 
the  visitor  either  in  the  town  or  its  surroundings. 

Yet  Blagovestchensk  is  regarded  by  the  people 
as,  next  to  Vladivostock,  the  most  important 
town — or  rather  city — in  Far  Eastern  Siberia  ; 
and  there  is  even  a  sort  of  see-Mecca-and-die  tone 
in  the  conversation  of  settlers  respecting  it. 
This  extravagance  is  excusable  enough,  for  the 
area  of  the  province  is  so  vast,  and  its  total  popu- 
lation is  so  small,  that  a  city  with  upwards  of  a 
myriad  of  people  in  it  is  of  as  much  relative 
importance  to  the  country  as  its  largest  cities 
are  to  England. 

But,  apart  from  such  considerations,  the 
simplicity  of  its  appearance  cannot  conceal  the 
fact  that  Blagovestchensk  is  a  prosperous  Uttle 
settlement.  Its  numerous,  well-stocked  stores, 
the  quality  of  the  wares  exposed  for  sale,  the 
comparatively  high  prices  which  they  command, 
and  the  evident  contentment  of  its  inhabitants, 
are  plain  proof  of  the  sufficiency  of  its  resources. 
So  enlightened  and  enterprising  are  its  citizens, 

8 


114  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

that  they  are  taking  steps  to  estabUsh  here  a 
Bacteriological  Institute  for  the  inoculation  of 
horses  against  a  form  of  anthrax  which  is  very 
prevalent  among  the  equine  population  of  the 
country,  and  is  known  as  the  '  Siberian  Plague.' 
Commercially,  this  city  owes  its  importance 
to  its  situation  near  the  confluence  of  the  Zeya 
with  the  Amoor,  for  on  the  banks  of  that  little 
river  have  been  discovered  some  of  the  richest 
gold-fields  in  the  empire.  The  mining  is  mainly 
in  the  hands  of  three  large  Russian  companies  ; 
but  there  are  also  many  syndicates,  and  even 
individual  diggers  working  on  their  OAvn  account. 
The  work  is  at  present  confined  entirely  to 
alluvial  deposits  ;  and  the  yield  of  gold  which 
passes  through  Blagovestchensk  averages  200,000 
ounces  every  year. 

The  city  is  politically  important  as  the  capital 
of  the  great  Amoor  province.  It  has  a  large 
military  depot,  and  in  the  city  and  its  neighbour- 
hood there  is  abundant  evidence  of  the  energy 
and  sagacity  with  which  Russia  is  establishing 
her  power  in  this  most  easterly  part  of  her 
dominions.  It  is  only  a  few  tens  of  years  since 
she  gained  possession  of  this  province,  and  though 
for  upwards  of  a  thousand  miles  there  is  only 
the  breadth  of  the  Amoor  between  the  territory 
of  Russia  and  of  China,  the  defence  of  this  ex- 
tensive frontier  is,  on  the  Russian  side,  complete. 


UP   THE    AMOOR  115 

In  addition  to  infantry,  whose  numbers  I  could 
not  ascertain,  there  are  in  this  province  30,000 
Cossack  regulars,  and  twice  as  many  more  re- 
serves, who,  with  their  families,  are  posted  along 
the  river  in  little  townships  twenty  miles  apart, 
and  who  support  themselves  by  the  cultivation 
of  plots  of  land  which  have  been  granted  to  them 
by  the  Government,  on  condition  that  each  man 
keeps  himself  and  a  good  horse  in  readiness  for 
active  service  at  a  moment's  calL 

The  Chinese  territory  on  the  other  side 
appeared,  over  extensive  areas,  to  be  neither 
protected  nor  inhabited.  Whatever  might  be 
the  nature  of  the  country,  whether  pine-clothed 
mountains  or  rolling  plains,  for  hundreds  of  miles 
there  was  no  town  or  village,  nor  even  house, 
to  be  seen.  It  looked  hke  a  veritable  No-man's 
Land.  During  the  last  few  years  the  Peking 
Government  has  made  some  attempt  to  es- 
tablish colonies  along  the  Manchurian  frontier, 
but  with  indifferent  success.  Tliere  is  one  fair- 
sized  town,  called  SakaUn,  nearly  opposite  to 
Blagovestchensk,  and  within  a  few  miles  above 
and  below  are  a  few  small  villages  ;  but,  with 
these  exceptions,  the  only  signs  of  human  life 
on  the  Chinese  bank  of  the  Amoor — and  these 
but  rarely — were  the  wigwams  of  some  wandering 
Tartars. 

The  transference  of  this  extensive,   valuable. 


116  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

but  altogether  undeveloped  territory  from 
Chinese  to  Russian  rule  is  only  a  question  of 
time  ;  and  let  us  hope,  in  the  interests  of 
humanity,  that  the  time  will  not  be  long. 

On  a  fine  calm  evening,  with  the  sun  just  setting 
in  the  west,  and  the  moon  rising  shyly  in  the 
east  to  peep  at  him,  we  loosed  from  our  moorings 
and  recommenced  out  run  up  the  Amoor.  We 
had  been  transferred  to  another  steamer,  longer 
and  broader  than  the  pre^^ous  one,  but  of  lighter 
draught,  and  propelled  by  a  single  paddle-wheel 
at  the  stern.  In  the  second  cabin  I  had  with 
me  an  entirely  new  set  of  fellow  passengers. 
There  were  too  many  of  us  for  the  size  of  our 
saloon,  but  my  companions  were  far  more  inter- 
esting than  those  I  had  left  behind  ;  and  as 
they  were  not  in  bondage  night  and  day  to 
baccarat,  we  had  diversity  of  occupation,  with 
plenty  of  entertaining  and  instructive  conversa- 
tion, and  so  our  life  was  less  monotonous. 

No  other  European  people  that  I  know,  and 
least  of  all  the  English,  are  equal  to  the  Russians 
in  the  freedom  with  which  in  a  promiscuous 
company  they  can  make  themselves  at  home 
with  one  another  ;  and,  now  that  serfdom  is 
aboUshed,  there  is  probably  less  of  hereditary 
exclusiveness  in  Russia  than  in  any  other  country 
in  the  world.  We  had  no  barge  in  tow  after  we 
entered  the  Amoor,   so  first  and  second  cabin 


UP   THE    AjVIOOR  117 

and  steerage  passengers  had  all  to  be  accommo- 
dated on  the  steamer  ;  and  a  very  miscellaneous 
company  we  were.  But  we  got  on  very  well 
together.  Natural  barriers  were  respected,  but 
there  was  no  attempt  by  those  on  the  other  side 
to  buttress  them,  or  to  enlarge  the  area  they 
enclosed  by  artificial  ones. 

In  the  first  saloon  were  a  dozen  military  officers 
of  high  rank.  One  of  them  was  a  General 
Gemelman,  over  sixty  years  of  age,  but  still  hale 
and  active.  He  seems  to  enjoy  this  rough 
Siberian  service,  and,  after  spending  six  or  seven 
hours  in  the  saddle,  says  he  thinks  nothing  of 
responding  to  some  urgent  message  by  another 
ride  of  twenty  miles  on  the  same  day.  He  did 
not  know  EngUsh,  but  was  fond  of  talking  French, 
and  we  had  many  an  hour's  interesting  conversa- 
tion. He  first  saw  active  service  in  the  Crimea, 
where  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  General 
Gordon,  and  commenced  with  him  a  lifelong 
friendship.  To  these  two,  '  Love  your  enemies  ' 
was  evidently  not  an  impracticable  command. 
The  last  letter  he  received  from  Gordon  was 
written  from  Khartum,  only  a  few  months  before 
its  fall. 

Another  noteworthy  passenger  was  the  colonel 
of  a  Cossack  regiment — a  man  in  the  prime  of 
life,  and  a  splendid  specimen  of  mascuHne 
physique.     He  spoke  English  fluently,  and  was 


118  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

full  of  information  about  the  history  and  re- 
sources of  Siberia.  There  appeared  to  be  no 
reserve  whatever  in  his  conversation,  and  he 
seemed  ready  to  talk  with  the  utmost  freedom 
on  all  sorts  of  subjects  ;  but  in  reality  he  was 
ever  on  his  guard,  and  the  slightest  and  most 
delicate  suggestion  or  inquiry  with  regard  to  the 
probable  extension  of  Russian  territory  on  the 
Chinese  side  of  the  river  invariably  led  to  an 
adroit  change  of  subject,  or  to  an  abrupt  termina- 
tion of  the  conversation.  One  could  not  but 
entertain  a  high  respect  for  the  wariness  and 
«eK-control  which  enabled  this  officer  to  associate 
such  perfect  reticence  with  so  much  frankness 
and  affability. 

A  number  of  younger  officers  were  with  me 
in  the  second-class  saloon,  and  these  I  got  to 
know  more  intimately,  but  acquaintance  only 
confirmed  my  first  opinion  with  regard  to  their 
courtesy  and  culture.  One  of  them,  indeed, 
had  a  lurking  suspicion  that  I  was  a  British  spy, 
and  he  shook  his  head  kno\\dngly  whenever  he 
caught  sight  of  me.  This  suspicion  probably 
persisted  to  the  end,  but  -svith  ever-lessening 
strength  and  definiteness.  The  suspicious  one 
was  never  impolite  ;  and  anything  hke  snobbish- 
ness in  any  of  them  I  never  saw.  They  were 
open  and  communicative  on  all  but  forbidden 
topics,  and  were  very  well  informed,  not  only 


UP   THE    AMOOR  119 

on  such  subjects  as  the  geology,  fauna,  and  flora 
of  Siberia,  but  even  on  Enghsh  literature.  In 
the  course  of  my  journey  I  met  with  hundreds  of 
men  in  their  position,  and  was  not  surprised  to 
find  a  few  boors  among  them  ;  but,  taking  one 
with  another,  it  is  only  just  to  say,  that  in  educa- 
tion and  refinement  ;  in  frankness,  intelligence, 
and  common  sense  ;  in  uniform  courtesy  of 
demeanour ;  and,  above  all,  in  freedom  from 
bondage  to  the  absurd  conventionahsms  of  caste, 
Russian  miHtary  officers  appear  to  be  at  least 
the  equals  of  any  other  members  of  their  pro- 
fession in  the  world. 

We  had  other  cabin  companions  of  a  rougher 
mould,  including  a  Mohammedan  Tartar,  named 
Aplin,  who  had  been  down  the  river  to  purchase 
hides  ;  and  three  horse-dealers  from  Tomsk, 
who  had  just  brought  a  drove  of  four  hundred 
horses  to  Blagovestchensk  for  the  Russian 
Government,  and  now  were  returning  home. 
In  appearance  these  were  Russians,  but  they 
told  me  that  their  nationality  was  Ivry,  and 
asked  if  I  had  ever  met  any  of  their  race  in  Eng- 
land. The  name  was  strange  to  me,  and  I  could 
not  for  a  time  imagine  to  what  portion  of  the 
world  or  to  what  people  it  referred  ;  but  one 
day,  when  leaning  on  the  bulwarks  of  our  steamer 
gazing  at  some  passing  scene,  I  quoted  in  soliloquy 
a    passage    from    the    Hebrew    Bible,    which    a 


120  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

friendly  rabbi  once  tauglit  me,  and,  being  over- 
heard by  one  of  the  horse-dealers,  he  ran  up  to 
me  excitedly  and  said,  '  So  you  are  Ivry,  too  ?  ' 
Honesty  compelled  me  to  disclaim  the  suggested 
kinship,  but  I  knew  now  that  Ivry  was  only 
another  name  for  Jew. 

I  saw  many  of  these  people  afterwards — 
both  exiles  and  free  emigrants — and  some  of 
them  appeared  to  be  very  estimable  persons  ; 
but  in  most  of  the  Russian  Jews  to  be  met  with 
in  Siberia,  craft  and  cupidity  are  so  conspicuous, 
that  though  they  do  not  of  course  justify  their 
persecutions,  they  do  much  to  explain  them. 
The  Ivry  always  complained  bitterly  of  the 
treatment  they  received,  and  when  I  asked  them 
why  they  were  thus  treated,  they  invariably 
replied,  '  Because  we  crucified  Jesus.' 

This  historic  fact,  ancient  as  it  is,  would  be 
likely  enough  to  feed  the  flame  of  resentment 
among  the  lower  orders  of  a  people  whose 
Christianity  is  of  the  Russian  type  ;  but  for  the 
kindling  of  the  flame  we  need  not  look  for  so 
remote  a  cause — we  have  it  in  the  heartless 
avarice  which  marks  the  monetary  deahngs  of 
this  people  with  the  Russian  peasantry.  Re- 
leased from  serfdom  within  the  last  thirty  years, 
these  peasants  have  not  yet  learned  to  manage 
prudently  their  own  affairs.  When  money  is 
needed  to  work  their  land,  the  simplest  way  is 


UP   THE    AMOOR  121 

to  get  it  from  the  Jews,  and  they  thus  fall  an 
easy  prey  to  the  pitiless  exactions  of  these  un- 
scrupulous money-lenders.  The  property  of  one 
after  another  of  the  peasant  farmers  of  a  district 
being  appropriated  by  the  usurers,  the  wrath 
of  the  people  at  length  breaks  out.  The  fire 
once  kindled,  all  that  is  bad  in  Jev.dsh  reputation 
and  history  becomes  so  much  fuel  to  support 
it,  and  a  terrible  vengeance  is  inflicted. 

Our  third-class  passengers  had  to  make  them- 
selves as  comfortable  as  they  could  upon  the 
deck.  There  were  about  two  hundred  of  them, 
the  majority  being  through-passengers ;  but  a 
few  joined  and  left  us  at  some  of  the  river-side 
wood-stations.  Among  these  transient  deck 
passengers  were  several  popes,  this  name  being 
in  Russia  the  designation  of  ordinary  priests. 
At  various  towns  and  villages  upon  the  way,  as 
well  as  on  the  steamer,  I  had  the  privilege  of 
frequent  interviews  with  men  of  this  fraternity. 
They  are  easily  distinguished  from  the  rest  of 
the  people  by  their  striking  appearance  ;  their 
hair,  which  is  allowed  to  grow  as  long  as  a  woman's, 
being  parted  in  the  middle,  and  hanging  loosely 
down  their  back ;  and  their  robe,  which  is 
often  of  a  light-blue  colour,  being  long  enough 
to  reach  almost  to  their  feet. 

Though  the  people  here  esteem  so  highly 
the  church  and  its  services,  they  do  not  seem 


122  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

to  entertain  any  special  veneration  for  their 
priest.  But  if  they  do  not  reverence  him  like 
the  Irish,  they  neither  laugh  at  him  like  the 
French,  nor  shun  him  like  many  of  the  English. 
They  believe  that  priestly  functions  are  impor- 
tant, just  as  we  believe  the  delivery  of  letters  is 
important  ;  but,  apart  from  those  functions,  a 
pope  is  of  no  more  consequence  to  the  people 
of  Siberia  than  a  postman  off  duty  is  to  us. 
But  though  a  pope  of  the  Russian  Church  is 
on  ordinary  occasions  treated  by  the  people 
with  mere  ordinary  courtesy,  like  an  ordinary 
man,  he  is  regarded  by  the  Government  as  an 
essential  part  of  the  machinery  of  State,  and 
is  protected  from  injurj/  and  insult  by  most 
rigorous  laws. 

Personally,  the  popes  of  Siberia  appear  to  be 
a  very  simple-minded  set  of  men  ;  knowing 
little  except  theology,  and  not  much,  I  should 
think,  of  that.  I  never  met  one  who  could 
speak  any  other  language  than  his  own  ;  and 
their  education  as  a  class  compares  very  un- 
favourably with  that  of  Russian  naval  and 
military  officers,  and  still  more  unfavourably  with 
that  of  the  priests  of  the  Church  of  Rome. 

Their  moral  character  is  held  to  be  without 
reproach.  Each  is  supposed  to  be  '  the  husband 
of  one  wife,'  and,  according  to  the  Greek  Church 
interpretation   of    that   apostolic   phrase,    he   is 


UP   THE    AMOOR  123 

not  allowed  to  marry  another  wife  when  the 
first  is  dead.  But  the  letter  of  this  requirement 
is  evidently  believed  to  be  more  important  than 
its  spirit,  and  a  widower-pope,  though  forbidden 
to  re-marry,  may  take  a  mistress  with  impunity. 
When  little  children  are  left  upon  his  hands  who 
require  a  mother's  care,  the  poor  pope  is  almost 
forced  to  such  a  compromise  ;  but  in  no  case 
is  such  an  irregular  alliance  formed  surrepti 
tiously.  The  relationship  is  recognized  by  th 
parishioners  without  any  reflection  upon  their 
pope's  virtue  or  respectability,  and  there  is  no 
more  reserve  in  speaking  of  one  woman  as 
a  pope's  mistress  than  there  is  in  speaking  of 
another  as  a  pope's  wife. 

The  churchmen  on  our  steamer  were  only  travel- 
ling short  distances,  and  were  never  more  than  a 
day  or  two  on  board  ;  but  most  of  our  steerage 
passengers  were  time-expired  soldiers  going  home, 
and  they  remained  with  us  throughout  our  three 
or  four  weeks'  run.  They  had  no  accommodation 
but  the  deck,  with  an  awning  to  protect  them 
from  the  rain,  but  with  no  shelter  from  the  wind 
and  frost.  In  the  sunshine  at  noonday  the  air 
was  comfortably  warm,  but  with  masses  of 
ice  upon  the  river,  and  of  snow  upon  its  banks, 
it  was  bitterly  cold  at  night.  No  food  was 
provided  for  the  deck  passengers,  who  had  to 
be  content  with  what  they  had  brought  with 


124  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

them  or  what  they  could  purchase  at  the  wood- 
stations  ;  and  not  being  allowed  to  cook  on 
board,  at  meal  after  meal  their  only  fare  was 
old  toasted  bread  and  coarse  rusks  dipped  in  hot 
tea,  with  the  occasional  luxury  of  hard-boiled 
eggs. 

These  Russian  soldiers  were  exceedingly  well 
behaved,  and  were  models  of  patient  endurance 
— sleeping  on  the  bare  deck,  eating  the  plainest 
food,  working  like  slaves  at  the  wood-stations 
carrying  fuel  to  the  steamer,  with  the  prospect 
of  two  thousand  miles  of  hard  walking  when 
their  voyage  on  the  river  was  completed  ;  yet 
they  never  complained.  They  did  their  best 
to  keep  themselves  and  each  other  cheerful  ; 
whenever  there  was  any  one  to  fiddle  for  them 
they  were  always  ready  for  a  dance,  and  often 
after  sunset  they  tried  to  keep  themselves  warm 
till  bedtime  by  singing  ballads,  in  the  choruses 
of  which  every  one  appeared  to  join. 

Some  of  the  soldiers  were  married,  and  had 
their  wives  and  children  with  them  ;  and  every 
afternoon  we  saw  these  soldiers  and  their  wives, 
utterly  regardless  of  their  own  personal  comfort, 
carefully  rearranging  their  boxes  and  bundles 
on  the  deck,  so  as  to  form  snug  recesses  in  which 
their  little  ones  might  safely  sleep  while  the 
chill  night  winds  blew. 

Steamers  on   the  Amoor,   like  those  on   the 


UP   THE    AMOOR  125 

Usuri,  use  wood  as  fuel,  a  fact  which  is  as  evident 
to  passengers  on  deck  as  to  firemen  in  the  engine- 
room,  for  not  only  is  an  awning  necessary,  but 
it  must  be  made  of  sheet-iron  ;  and  abaft  the 
funnel  there  are  frequently  repeated  showers 
of  red-hot  charcoal,  in  pieces  larger  than  a  hazel- 
nut. At  night,  when  we  happen  to  be  steaming, 
they  illuminate  the  ship  like  showers  of  falling 
stars. 

It  is  said  that  sjjrings  of  mineral  oil  have  been 
recently  discovered  on  the  island  of  Saghalien, 
and  that  very  soon  petroleum  will  take  the  place 
of  wood  in  the  firing  of  these  steamers.  Such 
a  substitution  will  mean  a  considerable  economy 
both  of  space  and  time,  for  the  quantity  of  wood 
required  to  keep  up  steam  is  enormous  ;  and 
I  was  surprised  to  find  that  the  continual  demand 
had  not  yet  made  any  perceptible  inroad  upon 
the  forests  of  this  region.  With  wood  filling 
our  bunkers,  and  stacked  up  in  every  available 
space  upon  the  deck,  in  less  than  twenty-four 
hours  we  had  to  stop  again  at  a  wood-station  to 
replenish  our  supply. 

At  each  of  these  wood-stations  was  a  settle- 
ment of  ten  or  more  log-huts,  the  settlers  not 
only  cutting  wood  for  the  steamers,  but  rearing 
a  few  cattle,  and  sometimes  cultivating  small 
plots  of  land.  No  sooner  was  our  steamer 
moored,  than  the  wives  and  daughters  of  the 


126  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

settlers,  with  tlieir  short  print-dresses,  hand- 
kerchief-bound heads  and  bare  feet,  came  to  the 
top  of  the  bank  above  us  with  bottles  of  milk, 
basins  of  clotted  cream,  loaves  of  bread,  and 
baskets  of  eggs.  The  steamer  was  the  only- 
market  available  for  the  sale  of  their  farm  pro- 
duce, but  they  generally  found  there  a  sufficient 
number  of  purchasers. 

Board  was  not  included  in  our  passage  money, 
but  was  supplied  to  order  by  the  ship's  steward 
at  a  fixed  charge  per  day.  It  was,  however, 
much  cheaper  for  each  passenger  to  provide 
board  for  himself,  and  on  this  steamer  all  except 
the  Government  officials  did  so.  We  could  not 
in  this  way  have  much  variety,  being  limited 
to  such  provisions  as  we  could  carry  with  us, 
and  the  few  simple  articles  of  diet  to  be  obtained 
at  the  wood-stations.  There  were  so  many 
passengers  on  our  steamer — the  first  this  season 
to  ascend  the  river — that  the  demand  for  milk 
and  eggs  was  in  excess  of  the  sup23ly,  and  the 
only  way  to  be  sure  of  getting  any  was  to  be 
among  the  first  ashore.  This  often  meant  a 
long  jump  from  the  steamer,  and  a  quick  run 
up  a  steep  bank,  but  I  generally  managed  to 
reach  the  sale-ground  before  the  last  bottle  of 
milk  had  gone. 

One  evening  at  dusk  we  found  ourselves 
running  for  several  miles  under  a  gigantic  clifi', 


UP   THE    AMOOR  127 

which  rose  from  the  left  bank  of  the  river  almost 
perpendicularly  to  the  height  of  several  hundred 
feet.  In  the  twilight  it  was  impossible  to  ob- 
serve its  structure,  but  it  appeared  to  be  of 
a  pale  grey  colour,  and  at  the  height  of  about  a 
hundred  feet  from  the  river  was  cut  by  two 
horizontal  strata  of  some  black  substance  which 
looked  like  coal.  On  the  face  of  the  cliff,  at 
various  elevations,  were  ridges  which  we  should 
have  believed  to  be  little  more  than  a  finger's- 
breadth  in  size,  had  we  not  observed  the  rows 
of  fir-trees  which  found  footing  there. 

There  are  few,  if  any,  rivers  in  the  world  whose 
scenery  surpasses  that  of  some  parts  of  the  Amoor. 
As  we  ascended,  it  became  wilder  and  more 
romantic  every  mile,  until  at  length  we  seemed 
to  be  enclosed  on  every  side  by  mountain  ranges 
and  primaeval  forest. 

Waking  very  early  one  morning,  and  finding 
the  cabin  stuffy — as  it  well  might  be,  with  every 
window  closed  and  twelve  of  us  sleeping  round 
the  table — I  gathered  my  rugs  around  me  and 
went  up  on  to  the  deck.  The  air,  though  intensely 
cold,  was  pure  and  bracing,  and  its  inhalation 
refreshed  one  like  new  wine.  A  fog  was  resting 
on  the  river,  and  for  a  time  this  gauzy  veil  of 
overhanging  mist  was  all  that  I  could  see,  but 
as  the  sun  came  nearer  the  horizon  the  veiling 
became  thinner  and  more  transparent,  and  soon 


128  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

the  shadowy  outline  of  some  bold  headland 
loomed  out  upon  us  through  the  haze.  As  the 
sun  rose  higher  the  outline  became  more  dis- 
tinct ;  other  bluffs  began  to  show  themselves  ; 
and  when  at  length  the  sun  broke  out,  the  mist 
had  vanished,  and  we  found  ourselves  cowering 
in  the  midst  of  a  titanic  concourse  of  hills  and 
mountains,  the  nearer  ones  clad  in  a  shaggy 
vesture  of  virgin  forest,  and  stooping,  as  it  were, 
with  age,  while  their  brothers  in  the  purple  dis- 
tance seemed  to  stand  on  tiptoe  to  peer  over  the 
shoulders  of  the  rest.  But  it  was  not  at  us  they 
gazed  ;  in  the  light  of  a  new  day  they  were 
looking  forth  upon  the  Infinite,  and  were  rapt 
in  such  absorbing  contemplation  that  our  little 
steamer  and  its  puny  freight  were  far  beneath 
their  notice. 

We  thought  we  were  alone  upon  the  river, 
until  our  attention  was  arrested  by  an  object 
floating  towards  us  with  the  current,  and  which 
proved  to  be  a  pine-log  raft,  upon  which  a  com- 
pany of  Siberian  peasants  were  making  their 
way  to  some  distant  settlement.  They  had  built 
for  themselves  a  small  log-hut,  and  planted 
young  fir-trees  round  it,  whose  roots  or  severed 
trunks  must  have  reached  into  the  water,  for 
the  foliage  looked  as  fresh  as  if  the  saplings  were 
in  their  native  soil.  There  was  an  oar  for  steering, 
but    there   were   no    means   of   propulsion,    the 


UP   THE    AMOOR  129 

stream  carrying  the  men  along  as  fast  as  they 
wished  to  go  ;  so  they  had  leisure  to  enjoy 
themselves,  and  in  their  tunics  of  Turkey-red 
they  lounged  in  all  sorts  of  easy  attitudes  upon 
the  raft  as  it  drifted  past  us  down  the  river. 

Sometimes  a  thickly  wooded  group  of  islands 
appeared  ahead  of  us,  breaking  up  the  channel 
of  the  river,  and  as  we  steamed  between  them 
it  seemed  as  if  the  great  Amoor  had  dwindled 
to  a  small  fishing-stream  ;  but  past  the  islands 
it  broadened  out  again  into  a  magnificent  ex- 
panse of  water. 

Siberian  sunsets,  if  less  gorgeous  than  those 
of  hotter  climes,  are  often  exquisitely  beautiful, 
and  none  are  more  so  than  those  which  are 
observed  amidst  the  scenery  of  the  Amoor, 
As  our  course  lay  westward  we  saw  them  to 
advantage,  and  one  evening  the  colours  of  the 
sky — azure,  pink,  and  orange — were  reproduced 
in  all  their  splendour  on  the  surface  of  the  river, 
the  light  of  heaven  marked  off  from  its  reflection 
by  a  line  of  forest-covered  hills. 

These  hills  seemed  to  gather  closer  round  us  as 
the  sun  went  down  ;  and  when  the  darkness  was 
too  dense  for  us  to  see  our  course,  or  the  reaches 
immediately  above  us  were  difficult  to  navigate, 
our  steamer  was  moored  for  the  night  against 
the  bank.  This  gave  our  poor  deck  passengers 
the    only    opportunity    they    had    of    getting   a 

9 


130  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

genuine  hot  meal.  They  could  not  cook  on 
board,  and  during  our  short  stay  at  a  wood- 
station  they  were  busy  carrying  fuel  to  the 
steamer  ;  but  stopping  for  the  night  gave  them 
a  chance,  of  which  they  so  quickly  availed 
themselves  that  in  a  few  minutes  our  decks 
were  quite  deserted. 

Those  who  were  not  engaged  in  cooking 
climbed  higher  up  the  wooded  steep,  and  sat 
there  singing  wild,  cheery  choruses  which  echoed 
among  the  hills.  We  could  not  see  the  singers, 
for  the  whole  scene  was  wrapped  in  darkness, 
save  in  a  few  spots  below  where  the  forest  was 
lit  up  by  blazing  logs,  around  which,  their  faces 
glowing  with  the  flame,  were  a  group  of  eager 
men,  each  with  a  pine-branch,  holding  in  fishrod- 
fashion  his  kettle  of  millet  and  potatoes  over 
the  fire. 

An  hour  later  the  fires  were  out,  and  all  the 
rest  of  the  passengers  and  crew  were  in  their 
beds.  The  forest-covered  mountains  stood  black 
against  the  sky,  their  shadows  lay  black  upon 
the  river,  and  all  was  still  as  death,  save  for  the 
occasional  splash  of  a  fish  or  a  fiight  of  nocturnal 
birds.  Then  I  began  to  shiver  with  the  cold, 
and  remembered  that  it  was  time  to  creep  under 
the  blankets  and  go  to  sleep. 

We  went  on  all  night  whenever  the  sky  gave 
light  enough  for  us  to  see  our  way  ;    and  some- 


UP   THE    AMOOR  131 

times,  when  the  stars  were  dim,  we  found  the 
river  was  lit  up  for  us  by  wide-spread  forest  fires. 
How,  in  these  unpopulated  districts,  such  fires 
are  kindled  no  one  seems  to  know  ;  perhaps  by 
a  flash  of  lightning,  or  a  spark  from  a  passing 
steamer,  or  the  smouldering  brands  of  a  camp- 
fire  left  by  some  careless  hunter  ;  but,  however 
caused,  when  once  started  these  conflagrations 
are  beyond  control.  They  burn  for  weeks, 
and  spread  over  the  forest-land  for  miles.  One 
night  we  passed  through  a  region  where  the  whole 
mountain-side  seemed  to  be  in  flames.  We  had 
seen  other  forest  fires  before,  but  none  on  such 
a  scale  as  this.  It  took  our  steamer  nearly  an 
hour  to  pass  it.  We  heard  the  flames  roar  as 
they  attacked  new  areas  of  stubble,  and  crackle 
among  the  prostrate  trees  ;  while  the  sky  above, 
and  the  surrounding  river,  and  the  awe-struck 
faces  of  the  people  on  our  deck,  reflected  the  red 
light. 

The  underwood  and  saplings  were  the  first  to 
yield,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  space  covered  by 
their  burning  ashes  we  sometimes  saw  a  group 
of  cedars — giants  of  the  forest — still  standing 
defiantly  amidst  their  fallen  brothers,  as  if  to 
challenge  the  advance  of  the  destroyer.  Their 
shaggy  forms  looked  black  as  night  against^the 
glowing  background,  save  where,  like  fiery 
serpents,  the  flames  twined  round  their  trunks 


132  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

and  branches  ;  and  with  a  clinging  persistency 
which  told  us  that  in  this  Lao  coon  struggle,  the 
serpents,  however  desperately  resisted,  will  secure 
their  prey. 

The  night  appeared  unusually  dark  when  the 
burning  forest  had  been  left  behind,  and  the  stars 
seemed  almost  afraid  to  shine.  But  the  officers 
on  watch  said  they  could  make  out  the  course, 
and  we  should  not  have  chopped  anchor  had 
we  not  been  compelled  to  do  so  by  an  exciting 
incident  among  our  passengers. 

On  the  morning  of  that  day  a  soldier  had 
fallen  overboard.  The  alarm  was  given  while  we 
w^ere  at  breakfast,  and,  rushing  from  the  table 
to  the  deck,  I  could  see  at  some  chstance  astern 
of  us  the  man's  head  above  the  water.  No 
life-belt  was  thrown  to  him,  and  though  the 
engines  were  promptly  stopped,  and  a  boat  was 
at  once  lowered,  the  strong  current  had  carried 
the  man  half  a  mile  away  before  the  rescuing 
party  left  the  steamer.  With  a  glass,  I  could 
still  see  the  soldier  swimming  for  his  hfe,  but 
just  before  the  boat  got  to  the  place  he  disap- 
peared. We  all  gave  him  up  for  lost,  and  were 
not  a  little  surprised,  when  the  boat's  crew 
returned,  to  find  that  they  had  the  soldier  with 
them.  Omng  to  the  clearness  of  the  water,  the 
drowning  man  had  been  still  visible  to  his  rescuers 
after  he  had  sunk,  and  catching  his  garments 


UP   THE    AMOOR  133 

with  a  boat-hook  they  hauled  him  on  board. 
He  was  quite  unconscious,  and  more  dead  than 
aHve  when  brought  to  the  steamer,  but  ^dth  a 
little  medical  attention  he  soon  revived. 

In  confirmation  of  the  adage  that  troubles 
seldom  come  to  us  singly,  a  little  before  midnight, 
on  that  same  day,  the  cry  was  raised  that  a  man 
was  missing.  Again  it  was  a  soldier,  and,  as 
a  long  search  had  been  made  for  him  before 
the  announcement  was  given,  there  could  be 
little  doubt  of  its  truth.  It  was  this  report 
which  led  to  the  sudden  dropping  of  our  anchor 
an  hour  or  two  after  the  great  forest  fire  was 
passed.  Of  course  we  could  see  nothing,  and 
though  profound  stillness  followed  the  stopping 
of  the  engines,  for  some  time  nothing  could  be 
heard  ;  but  at  length  there  reached  us  a  faint 
but  distinctly  human  call.  It  seemed  to  come 
up  the  river,  and  from  a  distance  of  several 
miles,  but  our  whole  ship's  company  united  in 
sending  back  a  call  of  recognition,  and  then  the 
boat  was  lowered.  We  watched  its  lamp-light 
fading  in  the  distance  until  it  became  invisible, 
and  then  waited  in  suspense  for  it  to  reappear. 
More  than  an  hour  we  waited,  but  at  length 
the  boat  was  again  alongside,  and  it  brought 
the  missing  soldier  safe  and  sound.  He  must 
have  been  an  unusually  expert  swimmer,  for  he 
had  been  in  the  ice-cold  water  for  upwards  of 


134  ACROSS   SIBERIA 

an  hour,  and  had  succeeded  in  taking  ofiE,  while 
swimming,  not  only  his  heavy  sheepskin  coat, 
but  even  his  top-boots. 

We  had  now  reached  the  lower  terrace  of 
the  table-land,  3,000  feet  above  the  sea,  and 
still  we  were  ascending.  The  river  was  now 
called  the  Shilka,  for  it  does  not  take  the  name 
of  the  Amoor  until  it  joins  the  Argun,  some 
1,600  miles  above  its  entrance  to  the  sea.  The 
Argun  runs  along  the  frontier  of  Mongoha, 
and  when  we  passed  its  confluence  with  the 
Shilka,  and  continued  our  course  westward  along 
the  latter  river,  we  no  longer  had  Chinese  territory 
on  our  left  hand  ;  the  country  on  both  sides 
of  us  was  Russian. 

The  banks  of  the  Shilka  were  mountainous 
and  densely  wooded  ;  but  in  some  parts  the 
ranges  receded  from  the  river,  leaving  on  its 
banks  wide  fields  of  grass-land.  These  fields 
were  generally  the  sites  of  settlements,  and  in 
one  of  them  we  saw  a  convict  station — a  big 
pile  of  buildings,  white  and  clean,  and  cheerful 
outside,  but  di'eary  enough  within ;  for  the 
penal  laws  of  Russia  are  intended  to  be  '  a  terror 
to  evil-doers,'  and  its  convict  system  an  object- 
lesson  to  enforce  the  truth  that  '  the  way  of 
transgressors  is  hard.'  The  pity  of  it  is  that 
the  innocent  so  often  suffer  with  the  guilty. 

On  the  following  morning  we  reached  Stretensk, 


UP   THE   AMOOR  135 

a  small  town  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river,  the 
head  of  its  navigable  portion  ;  and  so  the  ter- 
mination of  our  voyage.  More  than  a  month 
had  passed  since  we  left  Lake  Khanka,  and  we 
were  now  two  thousand  miles  above  the  mouth 
of  the  Amoor.  For  the  next  two  thousand 
miles,  with  the  exception  of  one  day's  steamer 
trip  across  Lake  Baikal,  we  must  travel  again 
by  tarantass. 


CHAPTER  IX 

FROM  STRETEN3K  TO  LAKE  BAIKAL,  BY  TAEANTASS 

It  was  about  nine  in  the  morning  when  our 
steamer  moored,  and  at  once  there  was  a  general 
rush  to  the  post-horse  station  to  secure  con- 
veyances. I  did  not  take  part  in  it,  for  the 
fifteen  horses  kept  here  were  not  sufficient  for 
the  mihtary  officers  among  our  passengers,  and 
their  claim  would  have  precedence  of  mine  though 
I  might  arrive  at  the  post-station  before  them. 
So  for  a  few  hours  I  was  content  to  stroll  about 
the  town — a  few  rambling  rows  of  log-houses, 
surrounding  a  small  market  and  a  church,  and 
extending  for  about  two  miles  along  the  right 
bank  of  the  Shilka  River  ;  and  then,  in  the  early 
afternoon,  having  purchased  enough  bread  to 
last  me  for  the  next  ten  days,  I  made  my  way 
to  the  horse-station,  and  learned  that  a  convey- 
ance would  be  ready  for  me  at  six  o'clock. 

A  few  hours  before  sunset,  on  a  fine  calm 
evening,  with  a  tarantass  and  three  horses,  I 
set  out  from  Stretensk  on  my  journey  of  a  thou- 

136 


STRETENSK    TO    LAKE   BAIKAL     137 

sand  miles  across  the  Trans-Baikal  province  to 
the  lake  from  which  it  takes  its  name.  I  had 
a  companion  with  me,  a  local  Russian  tradesman, 
who  asked  me  to  allow  him  to  join  me  in  hiring 
horses  as  far  as  Nertchinsk,  the  next  town,  but 
distant  about  a  hundred  miles. 

Just  outside  the  settlement  we  had  to  cross 
the  Shilka  by  ferry-boat,  and  this  was  my  first 
experience  of  a  mode  of  ferry  navigation  which 
is  common  to  all  the  great  Siberian  rivers.  The 
motive  power  is  simply  the  force  of  the  current, 
which  is  made  available  for  this  purpose  by  a 
simple  mechanical  device.  The  big,  ungainly, 
punt-hke  ferry-boat,  on  whose  broad  deck  two 
or  three  tarantasses,  each  with  a  team  of  three 
horses,  can  be  accommodated,  is  attached  by 
a  cable  to  a  small  boat-shaped  buoy  ;  by  a  second 
length  of  cable  this  buoy  is  attached  to  another  ; 
this  also  to  a  third  ;  and  so  through  a  series  of 
a  dozen  or  more,  until  lying  on  the  surface  of 
the  river  is  a  chain  of  buoys  and  cables  half  a 
mile  or  more  in  length,  the  upper  end  of  which 
is  fixed  by  a  strong  anchor  in  the  middle  of  the 
stream.  When  the  ferry-boat  is  loosed  from 
its  moorings,  the  helm  serves  to  keep  it  at  such 
an  angle  to  the  current  that  it  is  carried  by  it 
over  to  the  farther  shore  ;  by  another  turn  of 
the  helm,  it  is  when  required  brought  back 
again  ;  and  so,  like  a  big  horizontal  pendulum,  it 


138  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

swings  to  and  fro  from  one  side  of  the  river  to 
the  other. 

We  were  told  at  the  next  station  that  no 
horses  could  be  supplied  to  us  within  eight  or 
nine  hours,  and  had  it  not  been  for  my  Russian 
travelling  companion  I  should  have  had  to  stay 
there  all  night.  But  with  his  assistance  I  man- 
aged to  hire,  from  a  farm  near  the  station,  a  team 
of  three  horses,  and  a  light  four-wheeled  waggon 
called  by  the  people  a  telyega. 

One  of  the  civilian  passengers  from  our  Amoor 
steamer  had  been  waiting  at  this  station  with 
his  wife  and  sister  for  several  hours,  whihng 
away  the  time  by  drinking  vodka.  When  he 
saw  me,  with  so  little  delay,  mounting  the  cart 
to  continue  my  journey,  he  was  very  angry  ;  and 
having  imbibed  enough  spirit  to  deprive  him 
of  his  power  of  self-control,  he  stood  on  the 
doorstep  and  abused  me  roundly — being  specially 
indignant,  as  he  expressed  repeatedly,  that  I, 
a  fool  of  an  Englishman,  could  actually  travel 
along  a  Russian  road,  and  with  Russian  horses, 
faster  than  he  could  himself. 

A  telyega  is  by  no  means  an  improvement  on 
a  tarantass.  The  wheels  and  shafts  of  both  are 
similar,  but  the  body  of  our  telyega  was  simply 
a  cradle  of  rough  lattice-work,  so  shallow  that 
our  baggage  more  than  filled  it ;  and  as  we  lay 
or  sat   on  the    top,   there  was   not   an   inch   of 


STRETENSK   TO    LAKE    BAIKAL     139 

projecting  timber,  either  at  the  back  or  on  either 
side,  to  prevent  us  from  falling  off.  The  road 
was  rough,  the  roUing  prairie  across  which  it  ran 
being  indented  with  numerous  hollows,  which  the 
darkness  converted  into  pitfalls.  We  went  down 
"wdth  a  sudden  jerk  into  the  smaller  ones,  and 
had  several  narrow  escapes  of  being  upset  in 
the  larger.  The  hours  were  the  drowsy  ones 
immediately  before  and  after  midnight,  but  as 
a  moment's  relaxation  of  our  grip  upon  the 
ropes  which  bound  our  luggage  to  the  cart 
meant  an  ugly  fall,  we  were  too  much  on  the 
alert  to  sleep  ;  and,  for  comfort  and  security, 
I  don't  think  there  is  much  to  choose  between 
the  top  of  a  telyega  and  the  back  of  a  buck- 
jumping  horse. 

The  stage  was  an  unusually  long  one  of  twenty- 
five  miles.  We  did  not  pass  a  single  habitation 
on  the  way,  but  a  small  village  clustered  round 
the  post-station,  which  we  reached  between  one 
and  two  in  the  morning.  The  village  was  in 
total  darkness,  and  as  still  as  death,  when  we 
approached  ;  but  the  rattle  of  our  waggon  on 
the  well-trodden  street  woke  up  a  community 
of  dogs,  which  began  to  bark  ferociously.  Our 
driver  not  being  a  regular  post-horse  yemschik, 
was  not  sure  which  house  was  the  station,  but, 
as  locks  are  not  much  used  in  Siberian  villages, 
every  house  was  open  to  us. 


140  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

The  one  we  stopped  at  was  a  fairly  large  one, 
but  with  all  its  rooms  on  the  ground  floor.  My 
Russian  companion  opened  the  door,  and  we 
went  in  together.  We  could  hear  no  voice  or 
sound  ;  and  except  for  the  starlight  through  the 
windows,  all  was  dark.  Groping  our  way  towards 
the  interior  of  the  dwelling,  we  found  ourselves 
at  length  in  a  room  where  evidently  some  one 
was  sleeping.  My  companion,  familiar  with  the 
customs  of  the  country,  did  not  seem  at  all 
disconcerted,  and  I  tried  to  participate  in  his 
indifference  ;  but  our  movements  disturbed  the 
sleeper  ;  and  whether  that  white  figure  which 
sprang  up  in  bed,  and  asked  us  in  such  shrill  tones 
who  we  were  and  what  we  wanted,  was  a  man 
or  woman,  I  do  not  know,  for  at  that  moment 
we  heard  the  voice  of  our  driver  shouting  to 
us  from  the  street  that  we  were  in  the  wrong 
house,  so  we  got  out  as  quickly  as  we  could, 
and  found  the  post-horse  station  on  the  other 
side  of  the  road. 

Horses  were  soon  ready  for  us  at  this  station, 
and,  after  the  last  few  hours'  experience  of  a 
telyega,  a  tarantass  seemed  a  very  comfortable 
vehicle.  What  sort  of  a  road  we  had  to  travel 
on  I  never  knew,  for  soon  after  we  started  I  fell 
asleep,  and  I  slept  on  until  the  familiar  call  of  a 
cuckoo  woke  me,  just  in  time  to  see  the  sunrise 
before  our  road  dipped  down  into  the  valley,  in 


STRETENSK   TO    LAKE    BAIKAL     141 

which,  on  the  banks  of  the  river  which  gives  to 
it  its  name,  the  city  of  Nertchinsk  stands. 

The  little  city  of  Nertchinsk  was,  up  to  the 
beginning  of  the  century,  the  eastern  extremity 
of  the  Russian  dominion.  Until  recent  years 
it  was  the  principal  mart  for  trade  with  China, 
but  most  of  this  trade  has  now  been  trans- 
ferred to  Kiakhta — a  town  four  hundred  miles 
to  the  south-west,  on  the  northern  frontier  of 
Mongolia.  Nertchinsk  again  became  notable  for 
its  proximity  to  the  gold-mines  and  convict  settle- 
ment of  Kara.  Most  criminal  exiles  are  now  sent 
farther  eastward  to  the  island  of  Saghalien,  but 
the  lonely  settlement  of  Kara  still  contains  over 
a  thousand  prisoners,  washing  for  the  Govern- 
ment—  from  the  alluvial  river-bank  —  about 
50,000  ounces  of  gold  per  year. 

Nertchinsk  is  well  situated  on  a  steppe  of  the 
Lower  Plateau,  and  about  a  mile  from  the  Nertcha 
River  ;  but  it  is  an  irregular,  poorly  built,  and 
unattractive-looking  wooden  city,  with  a  popu- 
lation of  not  more  than  4,000,  most  of  whom  are 
engaged  in  cattle-breeding,  and  the  cultivation 
of  tobacco  or  cereals.  A  few  merchants,  trading 
in  furs  and  brick-tea,  also  reside  here,  and  the 
house  of  one  of  them — a  palatial  structure — is 
the  only  ornamental  building  in  the  place. 

Before  noon  I  was  on  my  way  again,  but  my 
progress  was  soon  arrested  ;  for,  on  reachmg  the 


142  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

banks  of  the  Nertcha,  we  found  such  a  strong 
wind  blowing  that  the  ferrymen  refused  to  run 
the  risk  of  taking  us  across,  and  we  had  to  drive 
back  to  the  city.  After  sundown,  the  wind 
abating  somewhat,  we  made  another  start,  and, 
though  big  waves  were  still  breaking  on  the  sur- 
face of  the  river,  we  succeeded  in  getting  with 
our  horses  to  the  other  side. 

Through  gorges  in  the  Yablonovoi  Mountains, 
which  form  the  eastern  border-ridge,  we  now 
began  by  gradual  ascents  to  climb  to  the  higher 
terrace  of  the  Great  Plateau.  Most  of  the  sur- 
rounding heights  were  thickly  wooded,  but  some, 
with  bare  dome-shaped  summits,  rose  above  the 
others  to  an  elevation  of  8,000  feet — beyond  the 
tree-line  in  this  latitude.  The  top  of  the  plateau, 
5,000  feet  above  the  sea,  is  wild  and  bleak,  and 
farther  northward  is  covered  with  perpetual  snow. 
Its  undulating  prairie  land  is  broken  in  some 
places  by  ranges  of  hills  which  rise  from  1,000  to 
2,000  feet  above  its  surface,  and  are  covered  with 
forests  of  larch  and  fir  and  cedar,  relieved  by 
thickets  of  birch.  The  land  between  the  hills  is 
generally  swampy  and  impassable  ;  in  other 
parts  it  is  fertile,  and  ajffords  good  pasturage  ; 
but  even  in  its  most  favoured  spots,  so  exposed 
is  its  position  and  so  short  and  uncertain  is  its 
summer,  that  agriculture  is  impossible. 

In  the  daytime  the  cold  did  not  seriously  trouble 


STRETENSK    TO    LAKE    BAIKAL     143 

us  ;  the  thermometer  told  us  that  the  tempera- 
ture was  low,  but  the  sight  of  sunshine  was 
suggestive  of  the  summer,  and  there  was  some- 
thing in  the  going  of  these  Russian  horses  which 
helped  to  warm  one's  blood.  When  warily  pick- 
ing their  way  through  a  broken  bit  of  road,  one 
shivered  with  the  cold  ;  but  when  the  horses 
broke  into  their  customary  gallop,  and  with  the 
jingling  of  bells,  and  the  shouts  of  the  yemschik, 
went  up-hill  and  down-hill  at  their  topmost  speed, 
a  thrill  of  sympathetic  stimulation  at  once  made 
the  pulse  beat  faster,  sent  the  tingling  heat  to  the 
tips  of  one's  fingers  and  the  ends  of  one's  toes, 
and,  while  the  run  lasted,  made  it  easy  to  forget 
that  the  wintry  air  of  the  high  Siberian  table-land 
was  round  about  us. 

But  we  went  on  continuously  night  and  day, 
only  remaining  at  a  station  long  enough  to  change 
horses  and  conveyance  ;  and  from  sunset  to  dawn 
not  only  was  the  temperature  lower  but  there 
was  nothing  to  divert  our  attention  from  it. 
One  night  there  was  a  fall  of  sleet,  which  a  strong 
wind  drove  fiercely  in  upon  us.  The  wind  was 
so  cold  he  seemed  to  come  direct  from  the  North 
Pole,  and  so  penetrating,  that  if  there  were  the 
slightest  chink  or  crevice  in  the  arrangements 
of  our  rugs  he  was  sure  to  find  it,  and  then  he  put 
his  icy  finger  through  and  touched  one's  arm  or 
neck   or   leg — sending   a    shudder    through    our 


144  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

frame,  and  making  us  clutch  desperately  at  the 
coverings  to  shut  him  out.  But  it  generally 
happened  that,  in  closing  one  aperture  against 
him,  we  opened  several  others  for  his  admission, 
and  so  we  were  driven  to  make  another  futile 
effort  to  exclude  him  ;  and  thus  through  the  cold 
night — with  a  few  intervals  of  broken  sleep — we 
managed  to  keep  our  blood  in  circulation. 

After  such  a  night,  with  joints  almost  dis- 
located by  the  jolting,  and  limbs  almost  frozen 
by  the  cold,  it  was  cheermg  to  look  out  in  the 
early  morning  and  see  through  an  opening  in  the 
pine-forest  the  light  of  the  sunrise  on  the  neat 
white  houses  and  churches  of  the  city  of  Tchita. 
It  was  not  so  pleasant  at  midday  to  be  trudging 
through  its  streets,  over  shoe-tops  in  sand  ;  and 
still  less  pleasant  in  the  evenmg,  when  a  stiff 
breeze  was  blowing,  to  have  that  sand  sweeping 
round  one  in  clouds  as  dense  as  those  of  the  sand- 
storms of  the  desert,  or  say,  of  other  Siberian 
towns.  And,  welcome  as  this  city  is  as  a  tem- 
porary oasis  to  the  traveller,  it  must  be  rather 
a  dreary  spot  to  make  one's  permanent  abode. 
Eastward  and  westward  there  is  no  other  town 
within  hundreds  of  miles  ;  southward,  at  a  con- 
siderable distance,  are  the  waterless  plains  of 
Mongolia  ;  and  northward  one  might  walk  as  far 
as  the  Polar  seas  without  meeting  any  sign  of 
human  habitation.     Yet  there  are  twelve  thou- 


STRETEXSK   TO    LAKE    BAIKAL    145 

sand  people  here,  and  the  city  is  relatively  im- 
portant enough  to  be  the  capital  of  this  extensive 
Trans-Baikal  province. 

Several  thousands  of  the  residents  are  soldiers, 
and  a  large  proportion  of  the  rest  are  in  the  em- 
ploy of  the  Government.  Not  less  than  four 
thousand  soldiers  from  Europe  and  Western 
Siberia  pass  through  this  city  ev^-y  year  on 
their  way  eastward,  and,  as  very  few  of  them 
return,  the  Russian  forces  on  the  frontier  must 
be  accumulating  fast. 

The  journey  as  far  as  Tchita  is  j)erformed  on 
foot,  but  the  soldiers  are  sent  on  from  here  by 
raft,  for,  the  Tchita  River  being  a  tributary  of 
the  Shilka — ^which  forms,  by  its  confluence  with 
the  Argun,  the  Amoor — there  is  a  continuous 
water-way  for  rafts  from  this  city  to  the  Pacific 
coast.  The  rafts  are  broken  up  and  their  timbers 
sold  on  reaching  the  lower  part  of  the  Amoor, 
so  that  a  fresh  fleet  is  required  every  year.  Some 
of  the  Government  officials  manage  to  make  a 
good  deal  of  money  out  of  this  raft-building  ; 
having  them  constructed  less  than  the  regulation 
size,  and  of  slighter  timbers,  and  then  pocketing 
the  balance  of  the  contract  price. 

About  two  miles  from  the  city,  in  a  lonely  spot 
on  the  banks  of  the  Ingoda,  enclosed  by  plain 
white  wooden  railing,  I  saw  one  day  the  grave 
of  a  former  governor  of  this  province,  who,  after 

10 


146  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

embezzling  large  sums  of  money  from  the  State 
by  this  raft-building,  lost  all  that  he  had  gained 
and  more  by  gambling,  and  then  came  out  here 
and  shot  himself.  They  buried  him  on  the  spot 
where  he  was  found. 

The  climate  of  Tchita  is  peculiar.  There  is 
little  rain  in  summer,  and  though  there  is  a  long 
ice-bound  winter  of  over  eight  months,  snow  is 
as  rare  as  rain  ;  and,  except  on  the  rivers,  wheeled 
vehicles  take  the  place  of  sledges  the  whole  year 
round.  This  scarcity  of  moisture  is  so  seriously 
detrimental  to  agriculture,  that  the  amount  of 
grain  produced  is  not  sufficient  for  local  require- 
ments. 

In  the  city  of  Tchita,  and  throughout  this 
province,  exiles  are  very  numerous.  Almost  all 
the  people  engaged  in  menial  employments — farm- 
labourers,  herdsmen,  and  yemschiks — are  ticket- 
of -leave  convicts  ;  and  the  Trans-Baikal  is,  in 
this  respect,  what  Botany  Bay  and  Van  Diemen's 
Land  were  at  the  beginning  of  the  century — a 
cesspool  for  the  rascality  and  crime  of  the  home 
provinces. 

A  dozen  political  offenders,  exiled,  not  for  any 
suspicion  of  a  crime,  but  for  sympathy  with 
Socialism,  are  now  located  in  Tchita.  Though 
not  allowed  to  leave  the  city,  they  move  about 
freely  within  it,  and  in  various  kinds  of  skilled 
handicraft  are  earning  their  own   living.     They 


STRETENSK   TO    LAKE    BAIKAL     147 

are  in  this  way  quite  an  acquisition  to  the  town. 
If  any  one  wants  a  piece  of  ornamental  furniture 
constructed,  or  a  scientiific  instrument  repaired,  or 
has  any  work  to  be  done  which  requires  delicate 
and  dexterous  manipulation,  he  sends  for  one 
of  these  exiled  Socialists.  They  do  not  visit 
among  the  people,  though  there  is  no  wish  to 
stand  aloof  from  them,  and  they  are  often  invited 
to  social  gatherings.  Probably  they  attribute 
their  exile  to  the  reporting,  by  false  friends,  of 
some  careless  word  spoken  in  such  circumstances, 
and  they  do  not  mean  to  be  caught  in  the  same 
way  again.  The  people  here  are  very  much 
surprised  to  find  that  men  whose  opinions  are 
considered  dreadful  enough  to  merit  exile  are  so 
well  behaved  ;  and  the  superintendent  of  the 
Tchita  police  remarked  one  day  that  if  all  the 
people  here  were  as  peaceable  and  law-abiding 
as  these  Socialists,  there  would  be  no  work  for 
him  to  do. 

I  met  with  an  English  lady  in  Tchita,  the  wife 
of  a  Russian  physician  who  holds  a  Government 
appointment  there,  and  it  was  an  exquisite  relief 
to  the  monotony  of  Siberian  travel  to  spend  an 
hour  or  two  in  their  snug  and  hospitable  home. 
The  home  was  pervaded  by  the  best  of  Christian 
influences,  for  the  religion  of  the  doctor  and  his 
wife  was  not  of  the  superstitious  Russian  type, 
nor  of  that  dreamy  sort  which  begins  and  ends 


148  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

in  heart-musings  and  soliloquies.  They  believed 
the  faith  of  Christ  to  be  indissolubly  related  to 
the  progress  and  uplifting  of  the  world,  and  so 
they  were  practical  and  warm-hearted  philan- 
thropists. 

A  few  years  ago  the  doctor  visited  America, 
and,  after  his  return,  his  friend,  Count  Tolstoi, 
asked  him  what  was  the  best  new  thing  he  had 
met  with  there.  The  doctor  at  once  replied, 
'  The  Temperance  movement.' 

To  Tolstoi  this  idea  was  a  revelation,  but  he 
eagerly  embraced  it,  and  set  himself  at  once  to 
organize  the  first  Temperance  Association  in  what 
is — with  the  possible  exception  of  England — the 
most  drunken  country  in  the  world. 

A  picnic  had  been  arranged  for  that  afternoon, 
and  I  was  invited  to  join  it.  In  the  bright,  warm 
sunshine  we  drove  out  to  a  narrow  and  secluded 
valley  a  few  miles  distant  from  the  town.  The 
deep,  clear  water  of  the  Ingoda  flowed  with  a 
strong  current  through  it,  and  on  either  side  rose 
rugged  cliffs  almost  precipitously  from  the  river. 
The  rock  was  fissured  and  furrowed,  and  scooped 
out  into  caves  and  hollows  and  recesses,  but 
evidently  by  no  recent  action  of  the  elements,  for 
the  lichens  had  covered  its  surface  with  their 
hieroglyphics  ;  every  projecting  ledge  was  fringed 
with  fern-tufts  ;  the  mosses  had  woven  a  thick 
carpet  at  its  feet ;    and  the  solemn  pines  which 


STRETENSK   TO    LAKE    BAIKAL     149 

look  down  into  the  river  from  the  top  seemed  to 
have  stood  on  that  brink  so  long  they  had  lost  all 
sense  of  danger. 

The  cliff-line  in  one  place  curves  back  abruptly 
to  enclose  between  it  and  the  river  a  broad  green 
grass-plat ;  and  here,  as  we  lounged  round  the 
white  tablecloth  to  our  picnic  entertainment  ; 
as  we  ate  our  English  cakes  and  drank  our  English 
tea — or  rather  Russian  tea  in  English  fashion, 
with  sugar  and  good  cream  ;  and  as  we  talked 
in  Enghsh — the  first  long  English  conversation 
I  had  had  for  weeks — of  English  friends  and 
English  homes,  it  was  not  easy  to  believe  that 
I  was  in  the  very  heart  of  the  wildest  province 
of  Siberia. 

Among  my  fellow  guests  at  this  picnic  was  a 
prince.  Datpak,  or  some  such  name,  they  called 
him,  and  he  was  a  prince  of  the  Tungus.  It  is 
well  to  meet  a  prince  sometimes,  if  only  to  remind 
us  how  much  like  ordinary  people  princes  are  ; 
and  travelling  in  remote  regions  gives  some  of  us 
the  only  opportunities  we  are  ever  likely  to  have 
of  such  interviews  with  royalty.  The  King  of 
Tonga  or  of  Timbuctoo  is  not  so  very  unapproach- 
able, and  to  meet  him  is  to  break  at  once  the 
spell  of  a  delusion  to  which  perhaps  we  have  been 
in  bondage  from  our  childhood.  By  right  and 
birth  and  blood,  as  true  a  king  as  ever  reigned  ; 
but  having  seen  him  once  we  henceforth  know 


150  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

that  our  nationality  is  more  important  than  our 
rank,  and  that  more  important  even  than  our 
nationality  is  our  kinship  with  the  human  race. 

This  Tungu  prince  had  taken  service  in  the 
Russian  Army,  and  had  been  admitted  to  official 
rank.  He  was  dressed  in  the  military  uniform 
of  his  promotion,  and,  having  received  a  European 
education,  was  familiar  with  the  conventionalisms 
of  Russian  social  life  ;  but  in  other  respects 
he  was  a  typical  specimen  of  his  race — of  short 
stature,  and  slim  but  well-proportioned  frame  ; 
with  dark,  widely  separated,  and  slightly  slant- 
ing eyes  ;  small  but  well-shaped  nose  ;  and 
squarish  head  covered  with  black  hair. 

Tchita  seems  to  be  the  head  quarters  of  the 
Tungus.  They  do  not  reside  there,  nor  indeed 
anywhere  else,  for  they  are  here  to-day  and 
gone  to-morrow,  being  so  persistently  nomadic 
that  they  rarely  remain  forty-eight  hours  in 
the  same  place.  Their  houses  are  simply  hollow 
cones  of  poles  and  reindeer-skins,  set  up  in  a 
few  minutes,  and  as  quickly  taken  down  ;  and 
as  they  have  no  cumbrous  furniture,  this  fre- 
quent change  of  residence  involves  little  ex- 
penditure of  time  or  effort  beyond  that  of  the 
journey  from  one  place  to  the  other.  They 
come  into  Tchita  to  dispose  of  the  furs  which 
they  have  obtained  in  hunting  ;  men  and  women 
riding  into  the  city  astride  on  reindeer. 


STRETENSK   TO    LAKE    BAIKAL     151 

Their  clothing  is  made  of  the  untanned  skins 
of  reindeer  fawns ;  and  both  sexes  dress  so- 
much  ahke,  that,  but  for  her  veil  and  shorter 
stature,  it  would  be  hard  to  distinguish  a  woman' 
from  a  man. 

The  vast  forests  of  the  High  Plateau  and  of 
its  eastern  border-ridge  are  the  favourite  haunts 
of  the  Tungus,  and  the  pursuit  of  game  is  almost 
their  only  occupation.  The  life  of  an  agri- 
culturist or  cattle-breeder  is  altogether  too 
tame  for  them,  and  Prince  Datpak  was  the 
only  one  of  his  tribe  I  heard  of  who  had  adopted 
European  civiUzation. 

They  are  evidently  a  Mongol  race,  and  are- 
probably  the  parent  stock  of  the  various  tribes 
of  aborigines — Goldis  and  Fish-skin  Tartars — 
met  with  in  the  lower  Amoor  and  Usuri  regions. 
Some  of  the  Tungus  are  reputed  to  be  Christians  ; 
but  though  desultory  efforts  have  been  made 
to  persuade  them  to  submit  to  the  rite  of  initia- 
tion to  church  membership,  no  pains  have  been 
taken  to  instruct  them,  and  it  is  said  that  most 
of  the  supposed  converts  know  nothing  what- 
ever of  Christianity  beyond  the  remembrance  of" 
the  saint's  name  given  to  them  in  their  baptism. 

Their  beliefs  with  regard  to  the  Supreme 
Spirit  and  the  future  world  are  those  of  Sha- 
manism ;  and  either  as  the  result  of  these  beliefs, 
or  in  spite  of  them,  the  Tungus  have  attained 


152  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

a  rectitude  of  life  which  has  greatly  impressed 
those  who  are  best  acquainted  with  them,  and 
has  placed  them  ethically  far  above  all  other 
Siberian  tribes.  Self-reliant  and  self-respecting, 
they  will  not  brook  an  insult  nor  inflict  one. 
Dishonesty  is  considered  a  disgrace,  and  thefts 
by  them  are  said  to  be  unknown.  Courageous 
and  persevering  in  the  chase,  they  are  able  to 
enjoy  and  do  full  justice  to  a  feast  when  they 
have  been  successful ;  but  failure  does  not  dis- 
turb their  equanimity,  and  they  can  so  patiently 
endure  the  pangs  of  hunger  that,  after  a  daj'^'s 
laborious  and  useless  effort,  they  will  come  back 
empty-handed  to  their  empty  wigwam,  and, 
without  a  word  of  complaint,  pull  their  waist- 
strap  tighter,  and  lie  down  to  sleep  in  the  hope 
of  better  luck  to-morrow. 

Western  settlers  are  encroaching  more  and 
more  upon  the  hunting-ground  of  these  people, 
and  as  they  show  no  tendency  to  assimilate 
with  their  invaders,  their  numbers  are  steadily 
decreasing.  The  Government  has  tried  to  foster 
and  protect  them  by  special  legislation,  but  so 
far  these  efforts  appear  to  have  been  in  vain. 
Races  may,  like  men,  be  stricken  with  incurable 
decline  ;  and  this  misfortune  seems  to  have 
happened  to  the  Tungus  and  their  kindred 
tribes. 

It  is  a  stiff  climb  to  the  level  of  the  Buriat 


STRETENSK   TO    LAKE    BAIKAL     153 

steppe,  one  of  the  highest  portions  of  the  Great 
Plateau,  and  for  more  than  an  hour  after  leaving 
it  Tchita  was  still  in  view.  We  had  started  at 
dawn  on  a  fine  calm  morning,  and  when  we 
reached  the  top  of  the  ascent  I  turned  to  take 
a  last  look  at  the  city.  The  mist  which  had 
been  lying  along  the  river  had  curiously  gathered 
into  a  white  dome-shaped  cloud  above  the 
houses.  Fires  had  been  already  kindled  on 
many  a  hearth,  and  in  the  still  air  the  chimneys 
sent  up  their  lines  of  light-blue  vapour  directly 
to  the  cloud,  which,  with  these  filmy  bands 
binding  it  to  earth,  seemed  like  a  great  white 
pavilion  spread  out  over  the  city.  A  desert 
may  be  as  safe  to  live  in  as  a  town,  but,  to  the 
imagination,  communities  of  men  seem  always 
to  be  canopied  by  some  mysterious  protective 
influence.  We  did  not  notice  the  paviHon  while 
we  were  beneath  it,  but  we  missed  its  screening 
shadow  when  we  went  away.  We  had  nearly 
four  hundred  miles  to  travel  before  reaching  the 
next  town,  and  as  our  horses  turned  over  the 
ridge  on  to  the  steppe,  whose  grassy  undulations 
spread  before  us  like  the  sea,  a  thrill  of  lone- 
someness,  like  a  sudden  fall  of  temperature, 
reminded  us  that  the  sheltering  canopy  was 
gone. 

For  scores  of  miles  there  was  nothing  to  be 
seen  except  this  rolling  grass-land,  which  would 


154  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

have  been  an  unbroken  expanse  of  green  but 
for  the  shallow  pools  which,  here  and  there, 
reflected  the  blue  sky.  In  some  parts  of  the 
steppe  we  saw  herds  of  horses'^and  cattle  grazing, 
and  they  relieved  the  solitude  ;  their  herdsmen 
were  not  visible,  but  we  knew  they  could  not 
be  very  far  away.  In  other  portions  of  the 
plateau,  from  one  horse-station  to  another, 
there  was  no  living  creature  to  be  seen. 

Hills  and  forest  land  at  length  appeared  again 
on  the  horizon,  and  soon  our  road  turned  down 
into  a  broad  open  valley,  where  on  the  border 
of  a  wide  mere  lay  a  small  village.  We  arrived 
there  on  the  morning  of  Trinity  Sunday,  and  all 
the  people  were  dressed  in  their  best  clothes. 
But  for  this  the  village  would  have  looked  very 
dreary,  for  there  was  no  paint  on  the  houses, 
and  nothing  about  them  to  relieve  the  dinginess 
of  their  old  weather-beaten  timbers.  The  land 
around  them  was  trodden  bare,  and  there  was 
no  such  thing  as  a  garden.  It  is  a  true  instinct 
which  leads  the  people  of  these  villages  to  choose 
such  warm,  gay  colours  for  their  garments  ; 
and  as  on  that  Sunday  morning  the  cottagers 
crowded  to  their  doors  to  see  us  pass,  the  fan- 
tastic head-dresses  and  pink-flowered  gowns  of 
the  women,  and  the  red  blouses  of  the  men, 
did  much  to  alleviate  the  otherwise  universal 
sombreness. 


STRETENSK    TO    LAKE    BAIKAL     155 

But  these  Siberian  peasants  have  other  ways, 
less  innocent  than  wearing  their  best  clothes, 
of  showing  their  appreciation  of  the  fasts  and 
festivals  of  Christianity.  On  Trinity  Sunday 
evening,  after  the  church  services  were  over, 
the  principal  men  and  women  of  the  village 
assembled  in  the  travellers'  room  at  the  post- 
horse  station,  to  honour  the  day  by  dancing 
and  vodka  drinking. 

The  piety  of  these  people  is  peculiar.  In  the 
observance  of  Christian  ceremonies  they  are 
most  exemplary,  and  manifest  for  the  externals 
of  religion  an  almost  superstitious  reverence. 
Of  those  accounted  orthodox  among  the  poorer 
classes,  few  will  enter  or  leave  a  room,  or  pass 
a  church,  or  take  anything  to  eat,  without  making 
the  sign  of  a  cross  ;  and  I  have  known  the  mere 
sight  of  a  New  Testament  arrest  a  flow  of  bad 
language,  and  make  a  set  of  gamblers  desist 
from  play.  But  to  many  this  reverential  re- 
cognition of  sacred  objects  is  the  sum-total  of 
religion,  and  all  that  is  believed  essential  for 
salvation  is  to  admit  the  truth  of  the  facts  and 
traditions  of  the  gospel,  and  to  take  part  in 
the  ceremonies  which  symbolize  them.  Of  the 
spiritual  meaning  of  those  facts,  and  their  bear- 
ing upon  character  and  life,  they  seem  to  be 
unaware ;  and  it  never  occurs  to  them  that 
there  is  anything  at  all  incongruous  in  showing 


156  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

their  respect  for  the  teachings  of  the  Church 
by  getting  drunk. 

The  heaviest  drinking  is  at  Easter,  which  is 
perhaps  the  most  popular  religious  festival  in 
Russia.  Whole  villages  then  give  themselves 
up  for  several  days  to  \vine-bibbing  ;  and  if  an 
astonished  stranger  asks  the  meaning  of  such 
carousing,  a  chorus  of  voices  instantly  replies — 
and  without  the  slightest  intention  of  irreverence 
— '  Why,  because  Christ  has  risen  '  ;  and  at 
the  word  they  chink  their  glasses  and  drink 
again. 

There  were  similar  scenes  on  Trinity  Sunday  ; 
and,  in  some  cases  at  least,  the  drinking  was 
continued  through  the  night,  for  passing  through 
another  village  in  the  forenoon  of  the  following 
day  we  saw  a  number  of  the  revellers  lying  in 
drunken  stupor  about  the  road,  and  our  yemschik 
had  to  turn  his  horses  aside  repeatedly  to  avoid 
running  over  them. 

Having  passed  the  steppe,  we  were  among 
the  trees  again,  and  from  the  branches  of  one 
or  more  of  them,  on  every  little  elevation  near 
our  track,  strips  of  rag  were  fluttering.  They 
had  been  placed  there  by  the  Buriats  as  charms 
against  evil  spirits.  We  were  now  in  the  heart 
of  the  Buriat  country.  The  plain  we  had  just 
crossed  was  called  the  Buriat  steppe  ;  Buriat 
yemschiks    drove    our    horses ;     and    at    every 


STRETENSK   TO    LAKE    BAIKAL     157 

post-station  the  Government  notices  had  Buriat 
translations  affixed  to  them. 

The  Buriats  have  characteristic  Mongol 
features,  but  they  are  taller  and  more  strongly 
built  than  the  tribes  met  "with  farther  east,  and 
have  much  more  energy  of  character.  They 
maintained  for  many  years  an  effective  resistance 
to  the  Russian  invasion,  but  the  omens  were 
against  them :  a  great  forest  fire  destroyed 
over  an  extensive  area  the  dusky  pines,  and 
white-barked  birch-trees  sprang  up  in  their 
stead,  and  so  the  swarthy  Mongols  knew  that 
they  were  destined  to  give  place  to  the  white- 
faced  Russians. 

But  conquest  does  not  to  the  Buriats  mean 
destruction.  Unlike  the  other  tribes  of  aborig- 
ines, they  have  been  able  to  adapt  themselves 
to  the  new  circumstances,  and,  side  by  side 
with  the  Russians,  seem  likely  to  hold  their 
own.  A  few  of  them  are  engaged  in  hunting 
and  fishing,  but  large  numbers  have  become 
agriculturists,  and  tens  of  thousands  of  acres  in 
this  province  are  cultivated  by  Buriat  farmers, 
producing  abundant  crops  of  wheat,  rye,  spring 
corn,  and  oats. 

But  by  far  the  larger  number  of  these  people 
are  employed  in  cattle-breeding.  The  herds 
we  saw  grazing  on  the  Buriat  steppe  were  Buriat 
property,    and   one   individual   sometimes   owns 


158  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

as  many  as  five  hundred  oxen  and  one  thousand 
horses.  They  are  good  riders,  and  perform 
most  of  their  journeys  on  horseback.  We  often 
met  parties  of  them  travelHng  in  this  way,  the 
women  sitting  astride  in  the  saddle  like  men. 
But  this  fashion  of  riding  is  not  peculiar  to 
Buriat  women ;  many  of  the  Russians  have 
adopted  it,  and,  judging  from  the  number  of 
officers'  wives  and  other  gentlewomen  we  saw 
taking  horseback  exercise  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  settlements,  the  side-saddle  appears  to 
be  quite  discarded  by  the  European  equestriennes 
of  Siberia. 

The  dress  of  the  Buriats  resembles  that  of 
the  Russian  peasantry  ;  but  the  hair  is  cut 
short  except  on  the  crown,  where  it  is  allowed 
to  grow  to  its  full  length  and  is  formed  into  a 
pig-tail — much  smaller,  however,  and  more  like 
a  genuine  pig-tail  than  the  long,  heavy  plait 
of  the  Chinese.  Women  dress  their  hair  into 
four  pig-tails,  and  in  married  women  these  are 
coiled  round  a  carved  piece  of  wood  about  a 
foot  in  length,  which  lies  across  the  back  of  the 
neck — a  symbol  of  the  marriage  yoke.  The 
pig-tails  of  girls  not  yet  betrothed  are,  for  the 
information  and  encouragement  of  wife-seeking 
young  men,  allowed  to  hang  freely  over  the 
shoulders. 

The   religion   of   most   of   the   Buriats   is   the 


STRETENSK  .TO    LAKE    BAIKAL     159 

Tibetan  form  of  Buddhism,  but  even  among 
these  the  superstitions  of  their  ancestral  Sha- 
manism are  by  no  means  extinct,  as  the  bunches 
of  torn  rags  which  we  saw  hanging  from  the 
trees  beside  our  road  so  plainly  prove.  The 
spread  of  Buddhism  among  them  is  compara- 
tively recent,  and  has  been  fostered  by  the 
Russians  ;  but  efforts  are  now  being  made  to 
convert  them  to  Christianity,  and,  from  a  long 
conversation  I  had  with  a  Russian  priest  who 
is  engaged  in  mission  work  among  them,  I  gather 
that  the  enterprise  has  met  with  encouraging 
success.  If  less  easily  persuaded  to  submit  to 
baptism  than  other  native  tribes,  they  are  far 
more  staunch  and  thorough  in  their  adherence 
to  the  faith  when  once  they  have  accepted  it  ; 
and  Buriat  members  of  the  Church,  who  number 
now  about  ten  thousand,  are  perhaps,  next  to 
the  Russians,  the  only  genuine  Christians  in 
Siberia. 

They  speak  a  language  similar  to  that  which 
prevails  throughout  Mongolia ;  but  for  their 
letters,  which  resemble  Syriac  though  written 
vertically  like  Chinese,  they  are  indebted  to 
the  Nestorian  missionaries,  who  made  such 
noble  and  self-sacrificing  efforts  to  evangelize 
Far  Eastern  Asia  a  thousand  years  ago.  Most 
of  the  books  in  circulation  among  the  Buriats 
appear  to  be  translations  from  Tibetan. 


160  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

The  Russian  settlers  in  this  province,  though 
far  superior  to  their  Mongol  neighbours,  associate 
freely  with  them  ;  and  at  one  of  the  post-stations 
a  Buriat  offered  himself  to  me  as  travelling 
companion.  It  is  such  a  common  thing  for 
Siberian  travellers  to  lighten  the  expenses  of 
their  journey  in  this  way  that  a  special  word 
is  used  to  describe  these  post-road  partnerships  ; 
and  when  one  traveller  speaks  of  another  as 
his  poyootchik,  he  simply  means  that  the  person 
referred  to  is  sharing  the  expenses  of  his  horse 
and  carriage  hire. 

Though  I  did  not  accept  the  offer  of  the 
Buriat,  in  one  part  or  another  of  my  journey  I 
had  a  number  of  popootchiks.  Some  of  them 
were  homely,  honest  Russians,  who  not  only 
made[^my  travelling  cheaper,  but  pleasanter  and 
more  expeditious.  Others  did  directly  the  re- 
verse. One  man  showed  his  appreciation  of 
my  company  by  borrowing  from  me,  to  meet 
some  pretended  temporary  emergency,  a  sum 
of  money  large  enough  to  leave  me  stranded  in 
the  middle  of  Siberia.  When  he  reached  his 
destination  he  vanished  like  a  ghost,  and  I  had 
to  get  upon  his  trail,  track  him  from  one  part 
to  another  of  the  settlement,  and  corner  him 
at  last,  before  he  showed  any  disposition  to 
refund. 

But   the   worst   of   my   popootchiks   was   one 


STRETENSK   TO    LAKE    BAIKAL     161 

who  joined  me  at  a  station  on  the  other  side  of 
the  Buriat  steppe.  He  was  a  tall,  big-boned, 
dark-complexioned  man  of  about  forty  years 
of  age,  with  some  such  name  as  Bruffski,  He 
wished  to  share  with  me  the  expense  of  horse- 
hire  as  far  as  the  next  town,  a  distance  of  about 
three  hundred  miles,  and  Avith  some  misgivings 
I  consented  to  the  arrangement.  We  were  to 
start  at  four  next  morning,  but  Bruffski  did  not 
turn  up  until  six,  and  not  only  had  he  a  bottle 
of  vodka  in  his  hand,  but  by  the  colour  of  his 
face  and  his  demeanour  it  was  evident  that  he 
had  already  a  fair  quantity  of  the  same  strong 
spirit  in  his  head.  As  soon  as  we  started  he 
began  to  drink  again,  so  I  took  the  bottle  from 
him  and  hid  it  in  the  straw  ;  but  he  found  and 
refilled  it  at  the  next  station,  and  took  care 
henceforth  to  keep  it  out  of  my  reach.  So  drunk 
was  he  after  the  first  day  that  he  was  seldom 
able  to  get  into  the  tarantass  or  out  of  it  without 
assistance. 

He  had  a  deep  bass  voice,  and  probably  had 
been  employed,  at  some  time  or  other,  as  clerk 
of  the  responses  in  one  of  the  Russian  churches. 
He  seldom  spoke,  but  sometimes  exercised  his 
voice  by  sounding  a  long  oo  in  a  fairly  deep 
tone,  and  then  rolling  it  out  an  octave  lower. 
The  last  oo  generally  resolved  itself  into  a  snore, 
and  Bruffski  lay  beside  me  like  a  log. 

11 


162  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

But  even  the  heavy  stupor  of  intoxication 
could  hardly  render  a  man  quite  insensible  to 
the  erratic  motion  of  a  tarantass.  In  one  place 
we  were  jerked  about  so  violently  that  my 
cow-hide  portmanteau  was  ripped  open  at  the 
seams,  and  I  had  to  gather  its  contents  together 
at  the  next  station  in  a  blanket.  That  one's 
own  skin  remained  unbroken  in  such  circum- 
stances is  an  unquestionable  proof  of  its  perfect 
toughness  and  elasticity. 

But  how  the  shaking  jarred  one's  nerves  ! 
BruflFski  had  a  big  feather  pillow  at  his  back, 
but  in  his  helpless  drunken  coma  any  unusual 
jerk  made  his  head  rattle  against  the  side  of  the 
tarantass  like  an  auctioneer's  hammer  on  his 
block.  At  this  he  usually  awoke,  but  only  just 
l6ng  enough  to  shout,  in  stentorian  voice,  '  Yem- 
schik,  stop  !  '  And  the  Russian  driver,  accus- 
tomed to  prompt  obedience,  at  once  pulled  up 
his  horses  and  stopped.  But  in  less  than  a 
minute  Bruffski  was  asleep  again,  and  when  I 
heard  him  snore  I  gave  the  signal  to  the  yemschik 
to  drive  on. 

And  so  we  went  on  together  all  day  and  all 
night,  and  from  day  to  day,  the  only  compensation 
to  me  for  the  misery  of  such  companionship 
being  the  thought  that  Bruffski  was  sharing 
the  expenses  of  the  journey.  But  even  with 
regard  to  this  some  doubt  at  length  arose.     The 


STRETENSK   TO   LAKE    BAIKAL     163 

man  had,  plausibly  enough,  suggested  that,  to 
save  the  trouble  of  dividing  our  expenses  at 
every  stage,  it  would  be  better  for  me  to  advance 
money  for  the  first  half  of  the  journey,  and  let 
him  do  so  for  the  second.  But  when  my  portion 
of  the  payments  was  completed,  he  coolly  told 
me  that  he  had  no  funds  ;  so  I  had  to  continue 
my  payments  to  the  end,  relying  upon  Bruff ski's 
promise  to  refund  his  share  of  the  expenses  as 
soon  as  we  reached  the  town. 

Several  days  afterwards,  late  in  the  afternoon, 
we  arrived  at  the  little  town  of  Verchni-Udinslc  ; 
and  if  I  was  glad  to  see  it  as  the  first  town  we 
had  come  to  during  the  last  four  hundred  miles, 
I  was  still  gladder  because  here  I  was  to  part 
company  with  my  drunken  popootchik.  My 
baggage  was  carried  into  the  travellers'  room, 
and  Bruffski  was  surprised  to  see  me  take  from 
my  pocket  a  roll  of  rouble  notes,  thinking — as 
I  had  intended  he  should  think — that  I  had 
only  enough  money  with  me  to  meet  the  actual 
expenses  of  the  journey  to  this  town.  But  for 
this  opinion,  and  his  own  drunkenness,  travelhng 
with  such  a  companion  on  dark  nights  and  in 
lonely  places  might  not  have  been  particularly 
safe. 

Bruffski  soon  went  out  and  ordered  another 
tarantass,  telling  me  that  he  was  only  going  to 
his  house  in  the  next  street,  and  that^  if  I  would 


164  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

go  with  him,  he  would  at  once  pay  me  what  he 
owed.  As  we  drove  out  of  the  stable-yard  I 
heard  my  companion  mutter  to  the  yemschik, 
and  I  caught  the  words  '  out  into  the  forest.' 
Away  we  went  at  full-trot  down  one  street 
after  another  till  we  reached  the  main  road 
which  leads  out  of  the  town,  and  I  saw  the 
fringe  of  the  pine  forest  about  half  a  mile 
ahead. 

There  were  houses  on  either  side  of  us,  and 
peopla  standing  at  the  doors  watching  us,  but 
in  less  than  two  minutes  the  last  house  would 
be  passed,  so  I  called  upon  the  driver  to  pull 
up.  Bruffski  told  him  to  drive  on ;  and,  as 
the  horses  were  now  going  at  a  gallop,  if  I  did 
not  mean  to  be  taken  out  into  the  forest  against 
my  will,  it  was  evident  that  something  must 
be  quickly  done.  So,  gripping  with  both  hands 
Bruff ski's  pillow,  I  pulled  it  from  behind  him, 
and  hurled  it  out  into  the  road.  At  once  he 
shouted,  as  I  had  so  often  heard  him  shout 
before  when  disturbed  in  his  drunken  sleep, 
'  Yemschik,  stop  !  ' 

He  told  the  yemschik  to  fetch  the  pillow,  and 
tried  to  detain  me  while  he  did  so,  but  I  was 
too  quick  for  him  ;  and  as  people  from  the 
houses  came  running  up  to  see  what '  was  the 
matter,  Bxuffski  thought  it  was  time^  to  get 
away,  so  he   drove  off  into  the  forest,  leaving 


STRETENSK   TO    LAKE    BAIKAL     165 

the  pillow  in  the  road  as  his  sole  contribution 
to  the  expenses  of  our  journey. 

They  told  me  at  the  post-station  that  all 
the  horses  were  engaged,  so  I  had  to  wait  at 
Verchni-Udinsk  until  the  next  day.  I  went  into 
the  travellers'  room,  but  found  that  it  had 
already  other  occupants — a  cosy  company  of 
two,  which  the  addition  of  a  third  would  spoil. 
They  were  a  young  Russian  officer  and  his  wife  ; 
and  if  it  be  true  that  courting  habits  do  not 
persist  long  after  marriage,  this  must  have  been 
a  newly  wedded  pair.  The  lady  was  resting  her 
head  against  the  shoulder  of  her  husband,  whose 
arm  was  around  her  waist,  and  they  were  very 
affectionately  holding  each  other's  hand. 

Facing  away  from  the  door,  they  could  not 
see  me  enter,  and,  thinking  how  shocked  they 
would  be  to  know  that  they  had  been  caught 
in  this  position,  I  stealthily  stepped  back  into 
the  stableyard.  But  it  was  very  cold  out  there, 
and,  after  walking  up  and  down  for  half  an 
hour,  I  went  back  to  the  room.  The  young 
couple  were  still  in  the  same  position,  but  as 
there  was  no  other  room  available,  and  I  was 
cold  and  hungry,  I  coughed,  to  warn  them  of 
my  presence.  I  coughed  very  gently,  but  if  I 
had  had  a  fit  of  whooping-cough  I  don't  think 
it  would  have  made  any  difference  ;  for  after- 
wards I  whistled,  and  then  walked  boldly  up  to 


166  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

the  window  without  producing  the  slightest 
symptom  of  confusion,  or  the  sHghtest  change 
of  attitude,  either  in  the  wooer  or  the  wooed. 

Others  came  into  the  room  presently,  both 
men  and  women,  but,  being  Russians,  they 
neither  laughed  nor  frowned  nor  looked  surprised, 
and  it  was  evidently  only  to  the  Englishman 
that  the  situation  seemed  in  any  way  peculiar. 
In  China  a  man  may  not  walk  out  with  his  wife, 
nor  appear  with  her  in  public,  under  any  cir- 
cumstances whatsoever.  In  England  a  man 
need  not  shun  his  wife's  company  in  places  of 
resort,  but  he  must  not  give  any  public  sign 
that  he  has  any  special  affection  for  her.  In 
Siberia  public  manners  are  not  so  restricted,  and 
the  people  evidently  think  no  more  of  a  kiss  or 
a  caress  between  persons  who  are  married  or 
betrothed  than  they  do  of  ordinary  hand-shaking 
among  friends. 

Verchni-Udinsk  is  a  cheerful-looking  little 
town,  with  the  Uda  River  bounding  one  side  of 
it,  and  the  pine  forest  every  other.  It  has  a 
population  of  about  five  thousand,  whose  white 
dwellings  are  overlooked  by  the  towers  of  three 
or  four  churches.  The  streets  are  very  wide, 
but  they  have  no  pavement  of  any  kind,  and 
making  one's  way  along  them  is  like  walking 
on  some  sandy  shore  above  the  water-line.  In 
this  respect  it  is  worse  even  than  Tchita. 


STRETENSK   TO    LAKE   BAIKAL     167 

Around  the  market-square  are  some  good  general 
stores,  and  the  bazaar  building  in  the  centre  is 
partitioned  into  a  number  of  little  shops,  where 
some  of  the  exiled  Jews,  who  form  such  a  large 
proportion  of  the  residents,  sell  furs  and  jewellery 
and  other  kinds  of  Siberian  produce.  In  most 
of  the  towns  of  England  there  are  shops  which 
advertise  the  wares  they  have  for  sale  by  a 
painted  representation  of  them  on  the  signboard. 
This  custom,  which  is  very  general  in  the  towns 
of  European  Russia,  is  almost  universal  in  Si- 
beria, and  is  a  great  convenience  in  a  country 
where  so  large  a  number  of  the  people  cannot 
read.  The  signboards  form  together  a  sort  of 
pictorial  epitome  of  the  social  life  of  the  neigh- 
bourhood. Various  articles  of  male  and  female 
dress,  house  furniture,  saddles  and  harness, 
agricultural  implements,  cutlery  and  crockery- 
ware,  carpenters'  tools,  packs  of  playing-cards, 
writing-paper  and  envelopes,  firearms,  musical 
instruments,  plates  of  cakes  and  French  rolls, 
dishes  of  sausages  and  brawn,  steaming  samovars, 
bottles  of  frothing  kwass,  decanters  of  vodka, 
pestle  and  mortar  and  boxes  of  pills,  coffins  and 
crucifixes, — all  these  things,  and  many  more,  may 
be  seen  represented  in  full-sized  painted  pictures 
on  the  signboards  of  any  important  Siberian 
town  ;  and  a  stranger,  wishing  to  make  purchases, 
has  only  to  walk  along  the  street  until  he  sees 


168  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

the  likeness  of  what  he  wants,  and  he  knows 
at  once  where  it  may  be  obtained. 

Having  replenished  my  store  of  provisions,  I 
was  ready  to  start  again.  The  road  from  Verchni- 
Udinsk  to  Baikal — a  two  days'  journey — crosses 
part  of  the  north-western  border-ridge  of  the 
High  Plateau — a  romantic  region  of  rolling 
table-land  and  forest-covered  mountains,  afford- 
ing from  their  slopes  far-reaching  panoramas  of 
fertile  valleys  and  winding  rivers,  with  horses 
and  cattle  on  their  banks,  and  here  and  there 
a  lonely  farmstead. 

Most  of  the  settlers  in  this  region  are  Raskolniks 
or  Nonconformists,  and  are  descendants  of  the 
men  who,  in  protest  against  the  Patriarch  Nikon's 
innovations,  severed  themselves  from  the  national 
church  ;  and  who,  a  hundred  years  ago,  flying 
from  the  persecuting  wrath  of  Peter  the  Great, 
came  to  these  remote  valleys.  They  and  their 
children  have  steadfastly  maintained  their  re- 
ligious independence,  and  preserved  their  purity 
of  blood ;  for  among  the  Raskolniks  on  the 
banks  of  the  Uda  and  Selenga  may  be  found 
to-day  some  of  the  noblest  specimens  of  the 
Russian  race. 

Near  the  town  a  second  road  branched  off 
from  ours  to  the  southward.  It  leads  to  Kiakhta, 
and  is  the  direct  route  through  Mongolia  to 
Peking.     These  two  are  the  onlv  roads  in  this 


STRETENSK   TO    LAKE    BAIKAL     169 

province,  and  so  the  greater  part  of  the  Trans- 
Baikal  region  is  inaccessible  except  to  foot  and 
horseback  travellers. 

It  was  a  splendid  morning  when  I  set  out 
from  Verchni-Udinsk.  Only  the  yemschik  was 
with  me  ;  I  had  had  enough  of  popootchiks, 
and  was  glad  to  be  alone.  The  country  looked 
extremely  beautiful,  for  the  winter  had  passed 
and  summer  had  come.  In  Siberia  there  is  no 
spring  to  speak  of.  As  the  sun  gains  strength 
he  melts  the  ice  and  dissipates  tlie  fog,  and  then, 
as  if  the  face  of  nature  had  been  touched  by 
some  magic  wand,  verdure  and  flowers  break 
forth  from  every  inch  of  soil,  and  in  a  few  weeks 
the  landscape  has  something  of  tropical  luxuri- 
ance, ^^^len  I  left  Lake  Khanka,  only  a  month 
before,  there  was  hardly  a  leaf  or  grass-blade  to 
be  seen,  and  now  there  was  vegetation  every- 
where. The  higher  slopes  were  red  vnih  azalea 
flowers,  and  many  of  the  shrubs  and  bushes  in 
the  foreground  were  masses  of  white  or  pinkish 
bloom.  The  roadside  was  lined  with  purple 
crocuses,  filling  the  air  with  a  fragrance  hke  that 
of  violets.  Then  we  saw  beds  of  yellow  daffodil 
and  white  lilies,  and,  more  rarely,  isolated 
specimens  of  that  beautiful  red  lily  which  is 
peculiar  to  this  part  of  Siberia.  One's  eye  passed 
from  these  to  throngs  of  pearly-white  anemones, 
parades  of  poppies,  and  acres  of  orange-coloured 


170  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

peony,  until,  fairly  dazed,  it  was  a  relief  to  rest 
on  a  soft  blue  area  of  forget-me-nots. 

For  a  long  distance  our  course  lay  between  the 
pine-clad  hills  which  enclose  the  Selenga  River. 
Through  the  dense  shrubbery  on  its  banks  we 
caught  glimpses  of  the  flowing  water  long  before 
the  river  itself  came  into  full  view.  It  is  a  stream 
of  considerable  size,  and  at  this  season  was 
rising  rapidly  from  the  inrush  of  melted  snow. 
But  the  rise  of  the  river  from  this  cause  is  soon 
over.  A  little  later  comes  the  melting  of  the 
subterranean  ice,  and  the  release  of  pent-up 
springs.  The  inflow  which  results  from  this  lasts 
longer,  and  so  swells  the  river  that  cargo-steamers 
are  able  to  run  from  far  above  Verchni-XJdinsk 
down  to  Baikal  and  Irkutsk. 

We  forded  many  of  its  tributaries,  and  among 
them  were  some  ideal  trout-streams — tumbling 
over  stony  ridges,  racing  down  beds  of  pebble, 
resting  for  a  while  in  deep  dark  pools,  and  then 
flashing  out  again  among  rocks  and  boulders  on 
their  way  to  the  larger  river.  Though  I  call 
them  trout-streams,  I  could  not  obtain  reliable 
assurance  that  trout  are  found  in  them  ;  but  if 
they  are  not  they  ought  to  be,  for  they  are  just 
the  kind  of  stream  that  trout  and  anglers  love. 

Towards  evening,  losing  sight  of  the  cultivated 
land,  we  entered  upon  a  long  stretch  of  dense 
and  continuous  forest,  and,  about  sunset,  arrived 


STRETENSK   TO    LAKE    BAIIvAL     171 

at  a  solitary  post-station,  over  which,  on  a 
Government  notice-board,  I  read — '  To  Moscow, 
5,496  versts.     To  Petersburg,  6,100  versts.' 

With  such  a  distance  yet  to  travel  there  was 
no  time  for  other  rest  than  that  which  the  taran- 
tass  afforded,  and  as  soon  as  fresh  horses  could 
be  yoked  we  were  off  again. 

Our  halt  was  just  as  brief  at  the  next  station, 
which  we  reached  about  five  hours  later.  It 
stood  quite  alone  in  the  depths  of  the  forest, 
from  which  it  was  fenced  off  by  a  rough  pine-log 
stockade.  The  night  was  starless,  there  were 
no  lamps  on  our  tarantass,  and  when,  half  an 
hour  after  midnight,  we  turned  out  of  the  ghm- 
mering  candle-light  of  the  stableyard  into  the 
impenetrable  blackness  of  the  forest,  the  sensation 
was  not  a  pleasing  one.  Before  me  I  could  just 
see  the  shape  of  the  fur-clad  yemschik,  and  up- 
ward, on  either  side,  the  outline  of  the  pine  tops 
black  against  the  sky.  It  must  have  been  by 
these  that  the  yemschik  made  out  his  way,  for 
there  was  nothing  to  be  seen  below.  Then  it 
began  to  get  colder,  and  hour  by  hour,  as  the 
night  advanced,  colder  still ;  until,  starting  from 
my  dozing  dreams,  I  half  expected  to  look  out 
upon  the  Polar  seas. 

The  da}^  dawned  at  length — a  cold,  grey 
morning,  with  a  sky  overcast,  and  a  keen  wind 
blowing.     The    very    pines    looked    ragged    and 


172  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

forlorn,  as  if  they  too  felt  the  sharpness  of  the 
wintry  air.  Suddenly  the  forest  opened,  and 
immediately  in  front  of  us  lay  the  edge  of  the 
table-land.  Beyond  it  there  was  nothing  but  a 
limitless  expanse  of  hazy  white,  and  it  seemed 
as  if  we  were  driving  off  the  world.  But  a  nearer 
prospect  showed  that  what  lay  before  us  was 
not  so  unsubstantial,  for  the  white  surface  we 
looked  down  upon  was  not  thin  air,  as  it  appeared, 
but  a  vast  plain  of  ice,  which  stretched  away 
beyond  the  reach  of  vision  to  right  and  left, 
and  on  before,  seeming  in  the  distance  to  be 
continuous  with  the  sky.  This,  the  yemschik 
told  me,  was  Lake  Baikal. 

Now  I  knew  the  meaning  of  this  sudden 
change  of  temperature.  Yesterday  driving 
through  fragrant  valleys,  beautiful  with  flowers 
and  warm  with  summer  sunshine,  in  the  darkness 
of  the  night  we  had  passed  into  another  zone. 
It  was  this  great  mass  of  frozen  water  which 
had  chilled  the  air  ;  and  if  in  June  the  Baikal 
Valley  is  so  cold,  in  winter,  when  the  snow  lies 
deep  for  months  along  its  shores,  and  fills  the 
surrounding  glens  and  valleys,  the  climate  must 
be  terribly  severe. 

After  a  few  hours,  as  we  drove  southward 
towards  the  post-station,  the  frozen  portion  of 
the  lake  was  left  behind,  and  we  saw  only  a  sheet 
of  steel-bright  water,  broken  by  a  few  detached 


STRETENSK   TO    LAKE    BAIKAL     173 

ice-masses  slowly  di-ifting  before  the  southern 
breeze  to  join  their  predecessors  in  the  north. 

Baikal  is  a  fresh-water  lake,  and  is  one  of 
the  most  remarkable  inland  sheets  of  water  in 
the  world.  Its  surface  is  1,500  feet  above  the 
level  of  the  sea  ;  it  is  nearly  a  mile  deep  ;  its 
length  is  equal  to  that  of  England  ;  and  it  covers 
an  area  of  12,430  square  miles.  The  Selenga 
and  Upper  Angara,  and  a  large  number  of  moun- 
tain streams,  flow  into  it ;  and  the  Lower  Angara, 
its  only  outlet,  carries  off  its  surplus  waters  to 
the  Yenesei.  Except  whore  these  rivers  join  it, 
the  lake  is  surrounded  on  every  side  by  moun- 
tains. Most  of  them  are  covered  with  dense 
forest,  and  one  of  the  peaks  which  look  upon  its 
southern  shore  attains  the  height  of  7,000  feet 
above  the  sea. 

A  striking  feature  of  Lake  Baikal  is  its  loneli- 
ness. Both  its  surface  and  its  shores  are  almost 
an  unbroken  solitude.  There  is  not  a  single  town 
upon  its  banks,  and  its  villages  are  few  and 
small.  A  steamer  crosses  its  southern  portion 
once  a  week  during  the  short  summer,  but  there 
is  little  other  navigation.  And  the  lonesomeness 
of  Baikal  is  not  relieved  like  that  of  the  ocean 
by  roaring  surf  and  rushing  waters,  for,  though 
its  surface  is  sometimes  swept  by  terrific  storms, 
and  at  a  few  miles'  distance  from  the  shore  there 
in  generally  a  strong  breeze  blowing,  the  water 


174  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

at  its  margin  is  often  too  still  to  give  a  sound. 
But  this  region  is  liable  to  frequent  subterranean 
convulsions — rumblings  and  quakings  and  even 
rendings  of  the  earth  ;  and  the  constant  appre- 
hension of  these  portents  makes  the  stillness 
weird  and  painful.  The  early  Russian  settlers, 
looking  out  upon  the  surface  of  the  lake  from 
the  gloom  of  the  forest  which  overspreads  its 
bordering  mountains,  were  so  impressed  with  the 
mystic  silence  of  that  vast  solitude  that  they 
named  it  '  the  Holy  Sea.' 

I  was  glad  of  an  opportunity  of  warming  myself, 
and  getting  a  breakfast  of  bread  and  milk  and 
eggs  at  the  Mecooski  post-station,  for  this  was 
wintry  weather,  and  I  had  been  out  in  it  all 
night.  No  steamer  had  yet  crossed  the  lake 
this  year,  but,  as  the  ice  on  the  southern  half 
had  been  broken  up  and  driven  northward  by 
the  wind,  traffic  might  recommence  at  any  time. 
As  I  could  obtain  no  information  more  definite 
than  this,  I  had  to  make  up  my  mind  to  wait 
at  the  post-station  until  a  steamer  came. 

The  hut  for  the  accommodation  of  travellers, 
with  the  stables  and  yemschiks'  cottages,  stood 
on  a  small  promontory  jutting  out  into  the  lake. 
The  sloping  hillside  at  the  back  was  covered  with 
virgin  forest,  consisting  chiefly  of  dark-leaved 
pines  and  larches,  which  crowded  close  up  to  the 
station  buildings.     No  other  traveller  was  there 


STRETENSK   TO    LAKE    BAIKAL     175 

when  I  arrived,  but  I  was  not  left  long  alone. 
In  the  evening  a  couple  of  Turco-Tartars  came, 
one  of  them  being  the  man  Aplin  who  was  a 
fellow  passenger  on  the  Amoor.  Other  travellers 
came  on  the  morrow,  and  in  a  few  days  our 
waiting-room  was  full. 

Some  poorer  travellers  found  lodging  for 
themselves  in  the  outbuildings.  Among  these 
was  a  typical  Siberian  peasant  farmer  returning 
from  Blagovestchensk  to  the  Volga,  and  whom 
I  had  met  with  before  on  the  way.  His  hair, 
which  was  getting  grey,  was  long,  and  parted  in 
the  middle,  according  to  the  custom  of  Russian 
peasantry.  He  wore  a  coarse  frieze  frock, 
gathered  in  at  the  waist  with  a  girdle  ;  and  his 
trousers,  of  similar  material,  were  tucked  into  a 
pair  of  top-boots. 

His  wife  had  died  at  his  little  farm  on  the 
Amoor  ;  and,  if  he  could  himself  manage  to  get 
on  in  Siberia  without  her,  he  did  not  think  his 
three  children  could.  All  his  relatives  were  in 
Europe,  so  he  sold  out  and  set  off  with  his  family 
for  the  old  home.  He  had  a  rough  canvas- 
covered  wagon  of  his  own,  for  which  he  hired 
horses  from  station  to  station.  He  seldom  came 
into  the  travellers'  room,  but  often  sent  the 
children  in  to  warm  themselves.  At  night  he 
prepared  a  comfortable  bed  for  them  in  the 
wagon,   he   himself    sleeping   among    the    straw 


176  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

in  one  of  the  stable-lofts.  The  eldest  child,  a 
girl  of  thirteen,  was  delicately  formed,  refined 
in  behaviour  and  appearance,  but  much  too 
pensive  for  her  age.  She  was  doing  her  best 
to  take  her  mother's  place,  not  only  in  caring 
for  her  two  younger  brothers,  but  also  in  trying, 
timidly  but  anxiously,  to  relieve  the  sense  of 
desolation  which  weighed  upon  her  father's 
heart,  and  made  him  sit  for  hours,  bare-headed, 
gazing  with  a  sad  abstracted  look  at  Baikal,  as 
if  thinking  of  the  now  lost  companion  who  was 
with  him  when  he  crossed  the  lake  before. 

The  travellers'  room  was  a  fairly  large  one, 
being  really  two  rooms  made  into  one  ;  but  it 
was  much  too  small  for  the  number  of  people 
in  it.  Our  fellow  guests  comprised  three  women, 
half  a  dozen  children,  and  as  many  men.  One 
woman  was  travellmg  with  her  two  little  boys 
to  Western  Siberia.  She  was  a  tall,  strong, 
resolute,  but  kindly-looking  person,  evidently 
well  educated,  and  of  good  social  position. 
Another  younger  woman  had  her  husband  with 
her  and  an  infant  child.  The  third  woman  in 
our  party  was  the  wife  of  a  Siberian  trader — 
a  most  phlegmatic  man — and  the  couple  were 
travelling  together  to  Irkutsk. 

Tarantass-riding  seems  to  be  specially  trying 
to  the  weaker  sex,  and  when  first  alighting  at  a 
post-station  most  of  the  women  that  I  met  were 


STRETENSK   TO    LAIvE   BAIKAL     177 

in  no  very  amiable  mood.  In  most  cases  a  glass 
of  tea  and  a  cigarette  did  much  to  calm  their 
irritated  nerves  and  smooth  their  ruffled  tempers  ; 
but  our  trader's  wife  was  not  so  easily  appeased. 

'  I  have  ordered  the  samovar  for  you,'  her 
husband  said  ;  '  and  here  are  the  matches  and 
some  cigarettes.' 

'  Sohaka  !  ' — you  dog — was  all  the  thanks 
he  got. 

With  no  perceptible  change  of  colour,  and  with 
no  suspicion  of  tremor  in  his  voice,  he  turned  to 
me  and  said,  '  Shall  we  go  for  a  walk  ?  ' 

The  poor  woman's  anger  had  time  to  cool 
while  we  were  out,  but  it  had  not  taken  advantage 
of  the  opportunity ;  and  when  her  husband 
asked  her,  '  Is  your  headache  better  ?  '  her  only 
reply  was  the  same  uncomplimentary  reference 
to  himself.  She  could  talk  fluently  enough  to 
others,  but,  until  a  day  had  passed,  she  had  for 
her  beloved  only  that  one  expressive  word,  and 
he  listened  to  it  every  time  with  the  same 
imperturbable  tranquillity. 

These,  with  the  Turco-Tartars,  and  a  couple  of 
hide  merchants  and  myself,  were  the  company 
which  lived  and  slept  in  that  one  room  during 
the  weary  days  of  waiting  for  a  steamer.  We 
each  had  our  own  provisions  with  us,  but,  as 
there  were  only  two  small  tables,  we  had  some- 
times to  wait  inconveniently  long  for  an  oppor- 

12 


178  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

tunity  to  get  a  comfortable  meal.  At  night  we 
had  only  to  select  a  place  on  the  floor  to  spread 
our  rugs  and  blankets,  and  then  lie  down  to 
rest.  But  with  so  many  sleepers  in  one  small 
room,  the  windows  and  doors  of  which  were 
always  tightly  closed,  the  atmosphere  soon 
became  oppressive,  and  it  was  a  great  relief  at 
sunrise  to  go  out  into  the  crisp  morning  air. 
Most  of  my  fellow  travellers  were  content  with 
a  Siberian  wash,  and  thus  left  more  room  for  the 
eccentric  Englishman,  who,  in  spite  of  the  almost 
paralysing  cold,  preferred  a  splash  in  the  big 
basin  of  the  lake. 

After  the  first  day  we  had  perpetual  sunshine, 
making  it  a  pleasure  to  wander  in  the  pine-woods 
or  on  the  shore.  The  lake  was  clear  as  crystal, 
and,  at  a  little  distance  from  its  margin,  blue 
as  sapphire  ;  but  if  a  crag  of  ice  came  drifting 
by,  it  broke  up  the  sunbeams  which  fell  upon 
it  into  their  prismatic  colours,  and  the  skirts  of 
its  robe  of  light  were  spread  out  upon  the  Avater 
like  a  rainbow. 

Fish  in  the  lake  were  rising  freely  at  a  small 
grey  fly — very  provoking,  when  with  so  much 
leisure  there  was  no  angling  apparatus  within 
reach.  Baikal  abounds  in  fish  of  many  kinds. 
Salmon  appear  to  be  most  plentiful,  and  thousands 
of  pounds'  worth  are  caught  and  dried  here  every 
season.     One   curious   fish,   the   comephorus,   is 


STRETENSK   TO   LAKE   BAIKAL     179 

found  only  in  this  lake.  It  is  of  small  size,  and 
of  the  codfish  family,  but  has  never  been  caught, 
and  never  even  seen  alive.  But  after  an  earth- 
quake, or  an  unusually  severe  storm,  large 
numbers  of  dead  ones  are  washed  ashore.  They 
are,  when  found,  of  the  loose  texture  and  mucila- 
ginous consistence  which  characterize  fish  living 
under  the  enormous  pressure  of  great  ocean 
depths,  and  so  it  is  inferred  that  the  comephorus 
haunts  the  profoundest  recesses  of  the  lake. 
"When  exposed  to  sunshine  on  the  shore  their 
substance  rapidly  evaporates,  leaving  only  a  thin 
strand  of  integument  behind. 

Seals,  though  not  fish,  are  a  fishy  sort  of 
animal,  and  Baikal  is  the  only  fresh-water  lake 
in  the  world  where  they  are  found.  They  are 
met  with  in  great  numbers  at  the  north  end  of 
the  lake,  and  the  Buriat  and  Russian  hunters 
sometimes  secure  as  many  as  a  thousand  seals 
in  one  season. 

The  few  days  of  sunshine  quite  changed  the 
climate  of  the  Baikal  Valley,  and  made  a  great 
difference  in  the  appearance  of  the  country. 
Willows,  birches,  and  aspens  were  seen  bursting 
into  leaf  ;  and  on  a  moist  spot  of  sheltered 
land,  on  the  outskirts  of  the  forest,  I  found 
some  flowers — beds  of  marsh-marigold,  cinque- 
foil,  wood-strawberry,  meadow-rue,  violets,  and 
forget-me-nots.     I  might  have  found  other  spots 


180  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

as  beautiful  if  I  could  have  stayed  a  few  days 
longer,  but  just  then  I  caught  sight  of  a  steamer 
making  its  way  towards  us  across  the  lake,  and 
I  had  to  hurry  to  the  post-station  to  inform  the 
others,  and  to  pack  my  things. 

In  a  few  hours  we  were  all  aboard,  and  long 
before  sunset  were  on  our  way  to  the  farther 
shore- 


CHAPTER    X 

THROUGH  IRKUTSK   TO   TOMSK,    BY   TARANTAS3 

I  CANNOT  say  that  I  saw  the  western  shore  of 
Baikal,  for  it  was  midnight  when  we  arrived,  and 
SO  dark  that  I  am  not  sure  whether  what  loomed 
before  us  was  a  hillside  forest  or  a  thunder-cloud. 
Before  dawn  I  was  far  away  from  it,  for  the  post- 
station  at  Leestvaneeshnia — the  long  name  of 
the  little  port  where  our  steamer  stopped — ^was 
quite  close  to  the  mooring-place,  and  had  such  a 
good  supply  of  horses  and  tarantasses  that  I 
was  able  to  start  at  once  ;  and  so,  by  seven  in 
the  morning,  the  fifty  miles  of  intervening  table- 
land was  crossed,  and  I  was  looking  down  from 
the  western  edge  of  it  at  the  city  of  Irkutsk. 

A  traveller  approaching  from  the  west  can 
only  see  it  piecemeal  as  he  passes  tlirough  its 
streets,  but  from  this  point  the  whole  city  could 
be  seen  at  once,  and  to  one  just  emerging  from 
the  eastern  solitudes  the  sight  was  an  impressive 
one.  The  plains  below  were  covered  for  several 
miles  with  the  white  buildings  of  the  city,  among 

isi 


182  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

which,  overtopping  all  the  rest,  stood  the  towers 
of  numerous  churches,  their  crosses  gleaming  in 
the  sunshine,  their  base  hidden  by  the  thick  foliage 
of  the  trees  which  had  clustered  round  them. 
The  beautiful  Angara  River,  a  third  of  a  mile 
in  breadth,  curved  half-way  round  the  city  on 
its  way  from  Baikal  to  the  Yenesei.  There  were 
gardens  on  its  banks,  and  most  of  the  surrounding 
land  was  under  cultivation.  Other  towns  and 
cities  of  Eastern  Siberia  are  important  only 
because  they  happen  to  be  situated  in  a  sparsely 
populated  country,  but  Irkutsk  is  a  city  which 
would  attract  attention  anywhere. 

It  is  much  older  than  the  cities  farther  east, 
and  occupies  the  site  of  a  still  older  Buriat  town 
— a  dirty  Mongol  settlement,  which  has  now 
given  place  to  the  broad  streets,  handsome  shops, 
substantial  business  offices,  commodious  hotels, 
and  neat,  cosy  dwellings  of  the  present  prosperous 
city. 

Much  of  its  commercial  importance  is  due  to 
its  situation  near  the  junction  of  the  two  main 
routes  by  which  tea  is  conveyed  from  China  to 
European  Russia — the  sea  route  from  the  Yangtse 
to  the  Amoor,  and  the  land  route  through 
Kalgan  and  Kiakhta.  But  the  chief  source 
of  its  wealth  is  in  the  mineral  treasures  of  its 
neighbourhood.  The  gold-mines  on  the  Lena 
have  long  been,  and  are  still,  very  productive  ; 


THROUGH    IRKUTSK   TO   TOMSK     183 

and  large  fortunes  have  been  made  there  by 
Irkutsk  settlers. 

Much  of  the  wealth  thus  acquired  has  been 
expended  on  the  improvement  of  the  city,  several 
of  its  citizens  having  made  munificent  bequests 
for  this  purpose.  It  has  more  than  one  good 
school,  from  which  youths  go  direct  to  the  Euro- 
pean universities  ;  two  large  public  gardens  ;  a 
well-kept  museum  ;  civil  and  military  hospitals  ; 
and  several  orphanages,  one  of  these  being 
specially  provided  for  the  children  of  Siberian 
exiles.  Such  an  institution,  like  a  silver  lining 
to  a  cloud,  helps  to  soften  the  rigorous  aspect  of 
the  great  AlexandrefPski  prison  in  the  suburbs 
of  the  city,  and  which,  though  only  a  temporary 
halting-place,  sometimes  contains  as  many  as 
two  thousand  convicts  waiting  to  be  drafted  to 
the  eastern  mines. 

Irkutsk  is  the  residence  of  a  governor-general  ; 
and  of  an  archbishop,  whose  new  cathedral,  not 
yet  completed,  has  cost  upwards  of  a  million 
roubles.  The  city  is  also  a  fortified  mihtary  post, 
and  the  seat  of  several  learned  and  philanthropic 
societies,  notable  among  the  latter  being  a  branch 
of  the  Imperial  Society  of  St.  Petersburg,  whose 
special  object  is  the  prevention  of  abuses  in  the 
acbninistration  of  prison  disciphne. 

I  reached  this  city  on  Sunday  morning,  and 
before   Monday   noon   was   on   the   road   again, 


184  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

commencing  another  tarantass  journey  of  a 
thousand  miles  to  Tomsk.  There  is  much  more 
traffic  on  this  part  of  the  post-road,  and  it  is 
better  made  than  its  continuation  farther  east  ; 
but  in  other  respects,  beyond  the  suburbs  of 
Irkutsk,  the  features  of  both  are  very  much  the 
same.  Towns  are  still  hundreds  of  miles  apart, 
but  villages  are  more  numerous,  and  every  fifteen 
or  twenty  miles  there  is  a  post-station. 

A  considerable  portion  of  the  first  half  of  the 
way  is  an  avenue  cut  through  one  of  those  im- 
mense tracts  of  virgin  forest  called  by  Russians 
the  taiga.  In  a  few  days  we  were  in  the  midst 
of  it,  and,  except  at  the  lonely  post -stations, 
there  was  nothing  but  the  beaten  track  to  in- 
dicate that  human  beings  had  ever  visited  these 
wilds  before.  Everj^-where  around  us  was  the 
forest.  It  dipped  down  into  the  valleys,  and 
spread  itself  out  over  the  hills  ;  all  day  and  all 
night,  and  on  from  day  to  day,  away  from  the 
stations,  there  was  nothing  to  be  seen  but  these 
close-clustered  pines  and  cedars,  and  the  dense 
underwood  which  found  shelter  at  their  feet. 

One  of  the  most  marked  features  of  the  forest 
in  the  dtaytime  was  the  absence  of  all  signs  of 
animal  life.  In  the  open  country  ground-squirrels 
were  numerous  all  along  the  road.  They  sat  on 
their  haunches  watching  our  approach,  and  with 
something  like  defiance  in  their  look,  but  as  we 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK  TO   TOMSK     185 

drew  nearer  their  courage  failed,  and  with  a 
sudden  somersault  they  dived  head-foremost  into 
their  burrows.  But  the  forest  seemed  forsaken. 
Even  birds  were  seldom  either  seen  or  heard, 
and,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  moths  and 
butterflies,  winged  insects  were  just  as  rare.  A 
month  later  the  place  would  be  all  aUve  with 
them,  and  mosquitoes  in  overpowering  swarms 
make  the  forest  uninhabitable  for  either  man  or 
beast.  It  is  when  crossing  rivers,  and  flying 
towards  the  treeless  plains  to  escape  from  these 
tormentors,  that  reindeer  fall  such  an  easy  prey 
to  their  more  formidable  enemies  the  Tungu  and 
Orotchi  hunters. 

The  forest  was  not  so  deserted  as  it  seemed. 
Often  at  nightfall,  as  the  odour  of  the  pine-trees 
began  to  exhale  into  the  air,  and  their  shadows 
to  gloom  upon  our  path,  I  saw  wild  deer  bound 
across  the  track  from  one  part  of  the  forest  to 
another.  And  there  were  plenty  of  other  animals 
as  well,  some  of  which  we  were  particularly  wish- 
ful not  to  meet.  Tigers  have  never  been  seen 
west  of  Baikal,  and  rarely  outside  the  Usuri 
region  ;  but  no  unsettled  part  of  the  country 
is  free  from  the  ravages  of  bears.  Travellers 
who  have  to  camp  out  in  the  woods  at  night 
run  the  greatest  risks  from  these  animals.  Even 
a  ring  of  fire  around  their  sleeping-place  is  not 
a  rehable  defence,  for  a  hungry  bear  is  cunning 


186  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

enough  to  know  that,  having  first  got  dripping 
wet  in  a  brook,  he  has  only  to  roll  over  on  the 
burning  brands  and  extinguish  them. 

But  the  most  numerous  and  destructive  beasts 
of  prey  in  Siberia  are  wolves.  They  commit 
great  havoc  among  sheep,  but  with  a  sort  of 
cannibal  propensity  prefer  to  all  other  food  the 
flesh  of  a  dog,  and  often  succeed  in  snatching 
one  from  between  the  very  knees  of  its  master 
while  travelling  at  full  gallop  in  a  sledge  or 
tarantass. 

In  the  winter,  when  scarcity  of  food  drives 
them  to  desperation,  they  do  not  hesitate  to 
attack  men  ;  but  a  well-mounted  Cossack  will 
boldly  ride  into  a  moderately  sized  pack  of  them, 
and,  though  armed  only  with  a  knout,  will  use 
it  to  such  purpose  that  the  wolves  fly  howHng 
to  the  woods.  When  pursuing  a  tarantass,  the 
pack,  if  not  too  large,  can  be  kept  at  bay  by  tying 
a  garment  to  a  cord  and  letting  it  trail  behind 
the  vehicle  ;  the  wolves  shy  at  the  mysterious 
object  like  a  timid  horse,  and  will  not  venture 
to  run  past  it.  But  a  Siberian  priest,  a  few 
months  before  I  was  there,  when  driving  out 
alone  in  the  forest,  was  killed  by  a  pack  of  wolves. 
The  horse  brought  the  cart  into  the  village  mth- 
out  a  driver,  and,  a  few  hours  later,  the  search 
party  found  not  only  the  bones  of  a  man,  but 
quite  near  them  the  fresh  remains  of  a  wolf.     In 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK   TO   TOMSK     187 

the  cart  also  had  been  found  a  recently  discharged 
rifle  ;  and  so  it  was  inferred  that  the  priest 
having  shot  one  of  the  wolves  pursuing  him, 
and  venturing  to  alight  to  secure  its  skin,  the 
horse  had  bolted,  leaving  his  master  defenceless 
to  the  returning  pack. 

At  night  the  cold  compelled  me  to  keep  well 
under  my  rugs  and  blankets,  but  sometimes  I 
ventured  to  look  out ;  and  if  those  black  things 
which  I  saw  beside  the  road  were  not  what  they 
looked  like — wolves,  but  only  what  the  driver 
said  they  were — burnt  stumps  of  trees,  I  cannot 
say  that  I  ever  saw  a  wolf  in  Siberia. 

But  I  had  once  a  chance  of  doing  so.  I  had 
been  talking  about  these  animals,  and  that  even- 
ing, a  httle  after  sunset,  the  yemschik  suddenly 
pulled  up  in  a  dark  corner  of  the  forest  and  said, 
'  Would  you  like  to  see  some  ?  ' 

'  Where  ?  '    I  inquired  ^^dth  some  eagerness. 

'  Well,'  said  he,  '  if  you  will  just  walk  straight 
down  into  the  forest  there,  while  I  stay  here  with 
the  horses,  I'll  bet  my  bear-skin  cap  that  before 
you  have  gone  half  a  verst  you'll  see  some  wolves.' 

I  did  not  go.  The  situation  was  one  in  which 
I  appreciated  company,  and,  if  it  were  only  a 
Russian  yemschik,  it  seemed  better  to  have  him 
near. 

Apart  altogether  from  the  wolves,  the  sensation 
of  being  alone  in  a  Siberian  forest,  especially  at 


188  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

night,  has  a  flavour  of  its  own.  I  had  already 
had  a  taste  of  it  in  the  Trans-Baikal  region.  The 
night  was  calm  and  clear,  but  the  noonday  sun- 
shine could  hardly  have  dispelled  the  gloom 
of  that  hollow  in  the  woods.  It  may  be  that 
spots  as  dark,  and  to  all  appearance  as  secluded, 
are  to  be  found  in  England,  and  even  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  busy  towns  ;  but  it  was  not 
easy  to  believe  it  at  the  time,  for  imagination 
insisted  upon  looking  at  the  actual  scene  in  its 
relationship  to  the  untraversed  wilds  around  it, 
and  the  long  interval  between  it  and  the  nearest 
human  dwelling.  It  was  this  which  made  the 
situation  weird,  and  quickened  one's  inner  senses 
into  such  unwonted  acuteness  and  activity. 

The  fir-trees,  for  ever  brooding  over  some 
great  secret,  made  morose  companions  ;  but  theirs 
was  not  the  only  presence.  The  Orotchis,  in 
addition  to  the  supreme  god  Anduri,  and  the 
gods  of  the  earth  and  sea,  believe  in  another 
spirit  which  haunts  the  deep  forest  shades.  They 
caU  him  Shahka,  and,  whenever  they  pass  a 
spot  like  this,  seek  to  propitiate  his  favour.  It 
was  not  hard  for  me  that  night  to  understand 
the  feeling  which  led  the  Orotchis  to  their  belief. 
The  very  air  seemed  to  palpitate  with  super- 
natural life  ;  and,  with  no  chirp  of  bird  or  hum 
of  insect  to  disturb  the  silence,  one  could  almost 
hear  the  music   of   the  spheres  ;    the   tread  of 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK   TO   TOMSK     189 

spirits  on  the  vault  of  heaven  ;  the  heart-throb 
of  the  universe  ;  and  it  was  a  positive  rehef  when 
a  crash  among  the  shadows  recalled  one's  thoughts 
to  material  concerns,  as  some  bear  plunged 
through  the  saplings,  or  some  decayed  giant  of 
the  forest  fell. 

Sometimes,  and  more  frequently  after  we 
passed  Irkutsk,  we  met  other  travellers  going 
eastward — military  men  or  emigrants  ;  and  at 
other  times  we  overtook  caravans,  of  perhaps  a 
hundred  or  more  carts,  carrying  tea  to  Europe. 
Almost  every  caravan  we  met  going  eastward 
was  a  caravan  of  big-wheeled  barrels,  in  which 
vodka,  the  favourite  strong  drink  of  the  Russians, 
was  being  conveyed  from  Western  Siberia  to 
remote  settlements. 

Occasionally  when  we  thought  we  were  alone 
we  were  startled  by  a  sudden  clank  of  chains, 
and,  coming  round  a  bend  in  the  forest  road, 
we  met  a  gang  of  exiles  on  their  way  to  the  prisons 
of  Kara  or  Saghalien.  There  were  seldom  less 
than  two  hundred  persons  in  a  gang — women 
as  well  as  men.  They  wore  long  coats  of  coarse, 
earth-coloured  frieze,  and  were  chained  together 
as  they  walked.  A  file  of  soldiers  with  fixed 
bayonets  marched  on  either  side  ;  there  were 
vehicles  in  front  for  those  who  were  sick,  and 
for  the  little  children  of  the  exiles  ;  and  so,  be- 
neath the  shadow  of  the  pines,  without  a  word. 


190  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

and  with  no  sound  but  the  confused  tramp  of 
feet,  and  the  mournful  clanking  of  the  chains, 
the  procession  wended  its  way  eastward,  never 
to  return. 

Exiles  were  first  sent  to  Siberia  in  1591,  and 
for  the  last  hundred  years  they  have  been  going 
there  in  an  almost  continuous  stream.  It  is 
said  that  from  seventeen  to  twenty  thousand  are 
now  sent  out  there  every  year  ;  but  this  number 
includes  many  of  the  near  relatives  of  convicts, 
who  voluntarily  go  into  exile  with  them,  and 
some  who  are  banished  for  a  few  years  only  to 
the  towns  of  Western  Siberia. 

The  gangs  of  exiles  we  met  on  foot  consisted 
entirely  of  criminals,  and  included  amongst  them 
some  of  the  vilest  of  the  human  race.  Capital 
punishment  is  extremely  rare  in  Russia,  and 
villains  who  in  England  would  receive  a  death- 
sentence,  and  in  some  parts  of  the  United  Sates 
be  lynched  without  judge  or  jury,  are  in  this 
country  sent  out  as  exiles  to  Siberia.  It  is  said, 
also,  that  Russian  criminals  are  generally  of  a 
more  hardened  and  desperate  type  than  those 
of  other  European  countries  ;  and  certainly,  if 
the  expression  of  their  countenance  may  be  taken 
as  an  index  to  their  character,  it  is  not  easy  to 
believe  that  there  are  any  worse. 

As  in  other  similar  companies  of  outlaws,  we 
noticed   many   who   appeared   to   have   become 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK   TO   TOMSK     191 

criminals  through  the  neglect  or  misuse  of  their 
faculties — their  moral  malady  was  functional. 
But  one  look  at  others  was  enough  to  give  the 
observer  the  impression  that  they  were  born 
for  crime  ;  that  they  evidently  lacked  some  of 
the  normal  moral  endowments  of  mankind,  and 
ought,  perhaps,  to  be  classed  with  the  maimed, 
the  halt,  and  the  blind.  Congenital  deficiencies 
and  deformities  had  contributed  largely  to  make 
them  what  they  were — their  moral  malady  was 
organic. 

The  appearance  of  the  women  convicts  shocked 
me  most.  If  not  actually  worse  than  the  men, 
they  seemed  so  ;  perhaps  because  of  the  beautiful 
background  of  ideal  womanhood  against  which 
their  moral  deformity  was  shown.  Such  faces  I 
had  never  seen.  Some  of  them  still  haunt  my 
memory — deceit  and  malignity  and  other  evil 
passions  had  traversed  them  so  often,  that  they 
had  trodden  the  features  into  a  stony  hardness 
from  which  nothing  beautiful  could  grow. 

A  large  proportion  of  these  female  prisoners 
were  dissipated  women,  bloated  with  self-indul- 
gence, and  apparently  dead  to  every  consideration 
except  that  of  personal  profit  and  enjoyment. 
Others  were  evidently  the  prey  of  influences  more 
malign.  One  woman  I  noticed  in  the  gang 
walking  along,  in  spite  of  fetters,  with  a  defiant 
air  ;   with  black,  short-cropped  hair,  sun-bronzed 


192  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

countenance,  high  cheek-bones,  Ups  as  thin  as 
paper,  and  compressed  so  tightly  one  could  hardly 
see  that  she  had  a  mouth  at  all,  and  eyes — with 
the  very  devil  in  them. 

At  some  distance  behind  her  was  another 
woman — a  different,  but  probably  as  desperate 
a  character.  Only  three  or  four  and  twenty 
years  of  age,  her  face  of  pink  and  white  was  sur- 
rounded by  a  wealth  of  flaxen  hair,  and  she  had 
such  large,  light-blue,  dreamy  eyes,  it  was  a 
puzzle  for  a  while  to  tell  whether  the  look  in 
them  was  one  of  childish  innocence  or  precocious 
maturity  of  crime.  But  on  closer  observation 
one  was  irresistibly  reminded  of  that  sleek  do- 
mestic animal  which  sits  purring  on  your  knee, 
with  paws  as  soft  as  velvet,  and  the  most  harm- 
less-looking creature  in  the  world — until  it  sees 
a  mouse,  and  then  how  the  tiger  nature  of  the 
animal  reveals  itself  as,  like  a  fiend  incarnate, 
she  tears  the  little  wretch  to  pieces !  If  this  girl 
had  been  guilty  of  the  crime  charged  against 
her,  these  feline  resemblances  were  true  to  life. 
But  the  pity  of  it  that  the  sweet  angel-nature  of 
a  woman  should  be  brought  so  low  ! 

There  were  many  others  there  whose  faces 
were  engraved  with  tragic  histories,  and  one 
would  have  liked  to  stop  the  gang  to  study  them. 
But  a  glimpse  had  to  suffice,  for  the  chains  clanked 
to   the  pace   of  its  advance   towards   the   next 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK  TO   TOMSK     193 

turn  in  the  forest  road,  and  in  a  few  minutes  we 
were  left  to  the  companionship  of  the  sombre 
pine-trees  and  our  own  more  sombre  thoughts. 

But  some  of  the  gangs  of  exiles  that  we  met 
were  not  on  foot,  but  riding  in  little  carts.  They 
wore  convict  dress  like  the  others,  and  so  there 
was  nothing  in  their  appearance  to  indicate 
superior  social  position  ;  but  a  glance  at  their 
faces  was  enough  to  prove  to  us  that  morally 
they  were  of  a  very  different  type  ;  and  I  was 
not  surprised  to  learn  that  these  were  not  criminal, 
but  pohtical,  exiles.  I  have  referred  already  to 
some  such  in  Tchita,  and  I  met  many  others 
afterwards — men  and  women — in  some  cases  of 
high  character  and  blameless  life,  who,  because 
within  the  circle  of  their  acquaintance  tliey  have 
given  expression  to  opinions  which  are  considered 
to  be  unfavourable  to  the  existing  form  of  govern- 
ment, are  sent  out  to  spend  the  remainder  of 
their  lives  in  the  desolate  seclusion  of  some  remote 
Siberian  settlement. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  opinions  subversive 
of  social  order  and  poUtical  stability  are  particu- 
larly rife  in  Russia,  but  the  Government  has 
yet  to  learn  that  its  policy  of  severe  repression 
is  increasing  the  evil  it  wishes  to  destroy.  It 
is  illegal  to  give  a  public  lecture  in  Russia,  or 
to  call  together  more  than  a  very  Hmited  number 
of   people    for    any   private   purpose    whatever, 

13 


194  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

even  for  a  dinner-party  in  one's  own  house, 
without  the  special  permission  of  the  poHce,  and, 
if  such  permission  is  granted,  it  is  on  the  express 
understanding  that  detectives  shall  be  admitted 
to  the  assembly.  The  intelligence  of  the  Russian 
populace  is  increasing  in  vigour  and  activity, 
and  thought  cannot  be  much  longer  denied 
utterance.  With  a  continually  increasing  pres- 
sure in  the  boiler,  there  is  only  one  alternative  ; 
and  if  in  Russian  society  the  safety-valve  of 
free  discussion  is  to  continue  weighted  thus  with 
exile  and  Siberia,  sooner  or  later  the  pent-up 
forces  Avill  release  themselves  by  the  explosive 
violence  of  revolution. 

A  large  proportion  of  the  exiles  of  Siberia  are 
either  political  or  religious  ;  but  in  Russia  the 
distinction  between  these  two  classes  is  not  very 
clearly  defined.  The  Russian  Church  is  so  closely 
connected  with  the  State  that  dissent  from  it  is 
a  political  offence,  and  the  object  for  which  re- 
ligious Nonconformists  are  sent  into  exile  is  not 
so  much  to  extirpate  false  doctrine  as  to  uphold 
the  power  of  the  Government.  It  is  said  that 
there  are  not  less  than  fifteen  millions  of  Dis- 
senters in  European  Russia,  and  this  is  evidence 
of  a  considerable  degree  of  toleration.  So  long 
as  a  religious  sect  continues  stationary,  does  not 
promulgate  its  doctrines,  and  only  enlarges  by 
the  natural   increase   of  its  own  families,   it  is 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK   TO   TOMSK     195 

generally  free  from  molestation.  But  when, 
like  the  Stundists,  a  sect  becomes  aggressive, 
disseminating  its  opinions,  and  seeking  to  win 
outsiders  to  its  fellowship,  it  comes  at  once  into 
collision  with  the  ruling  powers  ;  and  any  member 
of  another  church — whether  Dissenting  or  Estab- 
lished— who  joins  it,  puts  himself  thereby  outside 
the  law,  and  forfeits  all  claim  upon  the  Govern- 
ment for  the  protection  of  either  property  or  life. 
The  only  change  of  religious  denomination  allowed 
to  a  Russian  subject  is  from  one  of  the  sects  to 
the  Imperial  Church. 

There  is  no  attempt  to  extort  a  disavowal  of 
heterodox  opinions,  and  the  only  semblance  of  a 
religious  test  imposed  upon  the  people  is  the 
paying  of  tithes,  and  the  attendance  once  a  year 
at  the  parish  church.  If  there  is  any  narrowness 
about  the  clergy,  it  is  rather  ecclesiastical  than 
moral.  They  have  their  stated  round  of  duties, 
and  they  do  not  allow  their  calm  performance  of 
them  to  be  disturbed  by  much  zeal  for  righteous- 
ness, or  love  for  the  souls  of  men.  They  are  very 
lenient  to  their  parishioners.  Habitual  drunken- 
ness, dishonesty,  licentiousness,  even  atheism 
itself,  if  not  too  noisy,  seldom  provoke  serious 
denunciation,  and  are  regarded  as  venial  offences 
compared  with' that  of  joining  the  Dissenters — 
a  mortal  sin,  which  no  amount  of  intelligence, 
education,  or  saintliness  can  palliate.     So  long 


196  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

as  a  man  can  keep  himself  above  the  suspicion  of 
such  a  crime  as  this,  the  priest  will  treat  him  most 
indulgently  ;  and,  if  his  tithes  are  regularly  paid, 
even  the  annual  attendance  at  church  will  not 
be  rigorously  enforced. 

The  priests  of  the  Russian  Church  have  some 
excuse  for  their  lack  of  ethical  enthusiasm  in 
the  restrictions  imposed  upon  themselves.  Their 
duties  are  rigidly  prescribed,  and  there  is  little 
liberty  allowed  for  spontaneous  evangelical  effort. 
They  are  not  required  to  preach,  and  if  they 
wish  to  do  so  they  must  first  submit  their  sermon 
to  the  inspection  of  the  clerk  of  the  diocese. 
Even  after  it  has  been  thus  inspected,  an  un- 
guarded sentence  in  its  delivery  may  expose  the 
preacher  to  degradation  and  imprisonment. 

So  far,  the  efforts  of  the  Russian  Government 
to  enforce  religious  conformity  have  failed.  The 
more  Dissenters  it  sends  out  to  Siberia,  the  more 
there  are  to  send.  Exclusion  of  the  light  has 
not  so  much  prevented  development  as  changed 
its  character,  and  made  what  would  have  been 
otherwise  a  blessing  a  curse.  In  the  darlaiess 
noxious  moulds  and  fungi  flourish,  and  even 
wholesome  plants,  if  forced  to  grow  there,  are 
apt  to  assume  grotesque  shapes  and  ghastly 
colours,  and  acquire  deleterious  properties.  So 
with  independent  religious  thought  in  Russia  : 
having  been  denied  the  light  of  day  it  has  had 


THROUGH    IRKUTSK  TO   TOMSK     197 

to  do  its  best  to  flourish  in  obscurity,  and  there 
is  perhaps  no  other  country  in  the  world  in  which 
that  thought  has,  in  the  name  of  Christianity, 
attained  such  preposterous  developments. 

Many  of  the  Dissenting  churches  of  Russia  are 
of  the  Lutheran  type,  and  share  the  beliefs  of 
the  most  influential  parts  of  Christendom.  One 
modern  sect  resembles,  in  name  at  least,  our 
Salvation  Army,  for  its  members  call  themselves 
'  Soldiers  of  the  Spirit.'  They  are  great  colonizers, 
and  are  numerous  in  some  parts  of  Siberia. 
Other  small  bodies  of  Christians  there  are,  scat- 
tered about  the  country,  which  have  also  un- 
mistakably among  them  the  Life  which  was  the 
light  of  men.  But  side  by  side  with  these  are 
some  of  the  strangest  Christian  sects  in  the  world. 
Most  of  the  dissent  of  Russia  is  characterized  by 
a  leaning  towards  the  communistic  teaching  of 
the  earliest  days  of  Christianity,  but  in  some 
cases  it  is  avowedly  seditious  and  anarchicaL 
One  sect  refuses  to  recognize  the  State,  regards 
the  Czar  as  Antichrist,  and  allows  no  prayer  for 
him.  Another  sect  does  not  pray  at  all,  teaching 
that  all  rites  and  ceremonies,  including  prayer, 
have  been  abolished  by  command  of  God.  An- 
other sect  derives  its  name  from  its  belief  that  it  is 
wrong  to  pay  taxes.  Another  openly  advocates 
armed  resistance  to  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical 
authorities.     Another  sect  obliges   its  members 


198  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

to  associate  only  with  one  another,  and  refuses 
to  hold  any  communication  whatsoever  with  the 
wicked  world.  The  sect  of  '  the  Denyers  '  holds 
that  nothing  sacred  now  exists  on  earth.  Other 
sects  are  grossly  immoral — some  making  marriage 
dissoluble  at  will  ;  others  prohibiting  it  alto- 
gether, and  advocating  free  love.  One  sect 
enjoins  self -mutilation  ;  and  another  teaches 
that  as  God  called  upon  Abraham  to  offer  up  his 
son,  so  He  may  call  upon  us  to  do  the  same, — 
and  hundreds  of  children,  fourteen  years  old 
or  under,  are  said  to  have  been  put  to  death  in 
this  way. 

The  very  idea  of  sending  people  into  exile  for 
their  opinions,  and  especially  for  their  religious 
opinions,  naturally  excites  the  indignation  of  all 
who  have  been  taught  to  regard  liberty  of  con- 
science as  the  inalienable  right  of  man.  But  a 
careful  study  of  the  eccentricities  of  Russian 
religious  life  and  teaching — so  grotesque,  so  im- 
practicable, and,  in  some  cases,  so  subversive  of 
all  law  and  order  and  morality — would  show  us, 
perhaps,  that  the  problem  before  us  is  by  no 
means  such  a  simple  one  as  we  supposed.  Other 
powers  might  find  for  these  evils  a  milder  and 
more  effectual  remedy,  but  for  a  despotic  Govern- 
ment like  that  of  Russia  the  method  of  dealing 
with  them,  however  unwise,  could  hardly  at 
present  be  other  than  it  is. 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK  TO   TOMSK     199 

On  my  way  through  this  and  the  adjoining 
provinces  I  not  only  met  many  companies  of 
exiles,  but  sometimes  stayed  in  the  village  where 
they  halted  for  the  night  ;  and,  apart  from  the 
question  of  their  innocence  or  guilt,  they  had, 
as  prisoners,  little  to  complain  of  except  the 
hardships  inseparable  from  such  a  long  and 
difficult  journey.  Criminals  had  to  travel  the 
whole  distance  between  the  Ural  Mountains  and 
the  Amoor  on  foot  ;  but  they  were  never  required 
to  walk  farther  in  a  day  than  from  one  post- 
station  to  the  next.  Free  emigrants  often  do 
the  same  ;  and  so  of  course  must  the  soldiers  in 
charge  of  the  gang.  Political  exiles,  and  such 
criminal  exiles  as  are  pronounced  by  the  medical 
inspector  too  weak  to  walk,  have  horses  and 
carts  provided  for  them.  Neither  class  of  con- 
victs travels  more  than  three  or  four  days  without 
being  allowed  one  for  rest.  At  the  stations 
where  they  halt,  log-huts  are  provided  for  them, 
and  they  are  supplied  with  two  substantial  meals 
a  day,  each  of  which  includes  beef  or  fish. 

Arrived  at  their  destination,  criminal  exiles 
are  generally  sent  to  work  in  some  of  the  Govern- 
ment mines,  but  after  about  eight  years  of  servi- 
tude, unless  they  have  been  guilty  of  some  flagrant 
breach  of  prison  discipline,  they  are  set  free, 
and  permitted,  under  the  surveillance  of  the 
police,  to  make  a  home  for  themselves  in  one  of 


200  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

the  neigliboiiring  settlements.  Those  who  are 
exiled  for  their  opinions — whether  political  or 
religious — are  never  sent  to  the  mines,  but  are 
located  at  once  in  one  of  the  towns  or  cities  of 
Siberia,  being  allowed  to  live  in  their  own  house 
and  get  their  living  as  they  choose. 

Such  are  the  Government  regulations  for  the 
disposal  of  its  exiles,  and  in  the  great  majority 
of  cases  these  regulations  are  faithfully  observed. 
But  complications  may  easily  arise.  It  is  not 
strange  if  an  honourable  man,  sent  into  exile 
for  his  convictions,  has  his  temper  ruffled  by  a 
rankling  sense  of  the  injustice  of  his  punishment, 
and  if  he  is  in  some  instances  provoked  thereby 
to  resent  and  resist  the  indignities  to  which  he 
is  subjected.  But  such  resistance  is  a  crime,  and 
renders  its  perpetrator  liable  to  be  transferred  to 
the  gang  of  felons  on  their  way  to  penal  servitude. 
And  if  any  one,  of  either  class  of  exiles,  has  the 
misfortune  to  bring  upon  himself  the  ill-will  of 
the  officials  near  him,  there  are  plenty  of  ways 
in  which,  outside  the  law,  he  may  be  made  to 
suffer  for  it.  However  good  may  be  the  inten- 
tions of  the  Government  at  St.  Petersburg,  and 
however  humane  its  laws,  it  cannot,  in  such  a 
distant  and  unsettled  country  as  Siberia,  exercise 
efficient  control  over  the  executive ;  and  as 
throughout  the  empire  there  is  no  free  press, 
the  exiles  have  little  except  the  Christian  honour 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK   TO   TOMSK     201 

of  their  overseers  to  protect  them  from  the  freaks 
of  arbitrary  power. 

It  is  not,  therefore,  at  all  surprising  that 
irregularities  occur,  but  they  do  not  appear  to 
be  as  frequent  as  some  suppose.  In  reading 
descriptions  of  prison  life  in  Siberia,  we  often 
commiserate  as  hardships  deprivations  which  be- 
long to  the  ordinary  lot  of  Russian  and  Siberian 
peasantry.  And  the  actual  instances  of  cruelty 
and  oppression  which  are  from  time  to  time 
reported,  and  which,  justly  enough,  fill  us  with 
horror  and  indignation,  are  breaches  of  the  law 
which  the  Government  has  neither  sanctioned 
nor  approved.  They  are  to  be  classed  with  the 
similar  outrages  which  m  former  times  not  in- 
frequently occurred  at  our  own  convict  stations 
in  Australia,  and  with  the  lynchings  which  are 
so  common  to-day  in  some  parts  of  the  United 
States. 

The  convict  stations  of  the  Trans-Baikal  pro- 
vmce  resemble  in  many  respects  ordinary  Siberian 
villages  ;  there  is  no  insurmountable  surrounding 
wall,  and  it  is  by  no  means  difficult  for  an  exile 
to  run  away.  But  more  effective  than  artificial 
barriers  is  the  broad  area  of  wild,  inhospitable 
forest  which  on  every  side  surrounds  the  settle- 
ment. No  one  ever  thinks  of  attempting  to 
escape  in  the  winter,  nor  when  winter  is  ap- 
proaching,   but    the    spring    seems    to    offer    a 


202  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

favourable  opportunity.  The  cuckoo  is  always 
heard  in  his  season  in  Siberia.  The  exiles  speak 
of  him  as  '  the  king  of  the  woods ' ;  and  when, 
after  the  long  winter,  his  first  familiar  call  is 
heard,  the  prisoners  say  among  themselves,  '  The 
king  of  the  woods  is  calling,  it  is  time  to  get 
away.' 

Every  year  a  considerable  number  respond  to 
the  cuckoo's  invitation.  The  watch  is  not  par- 
ticularly close,  and  they  need  not  wait  long  for 
an  opportunity  to  slip  away  unobserved  into 
the  forest.  But  most  of  them  soon  find  that 
flight  does  not  mean  freedom.  Once,  on  an 
ocea,n  steamer,  a  thousand  miles  from  land,  some 
ducks  whose  pen  had  been  carelessly  left  open 
flew  overboard.  When  last  I  saw  them  they 
were  flapping  their  wings,  and  scuttling  about  on 
the  water,  in  high  glee  at  their  escape.  Before 
night,  if  a  shark  had  not  already  snapped  them 
up,  they  were  no  doubt  bitterly  regretting  that 
they  had  left  the  ship.  Such  liberty  as  the  ocean 
gave  those  ducks,  the  forest  gives  the  exile.  He 
may  in  the  autumn  sustain  life  for  a  time  with 
berries  and  cedar-nuts,  but  nothing  edible  is  ripe 
until  the  end  of  summer.  The  wilds  around  him 
are  infested  by  beasts  of  prey  ;  the  nights  are 
bitterly  cold  ;  and  he  has  no  place  of  shelter. 
He  must  not  show  himself  in  any  village  nor  at 
any  house,   for  his  passport  would  be  at  once 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK   TO   TOMSK     203 

demanded,  and  he  has  none  to  show.  He  dare 
not  even  meet  a  fellow  man,  except  to  overpower 
and  kill  him  ;  and  it  is  only  by  some  such  des- 
perate deed  that  he  can  preserve  his  own  liberty 
and  life.  Plunging  into  the  depths  of  the  forest, 
a  month  of  continuous  plodding  will  hardly  be 
sufficient  to  bring  him  out  upon  the  other  side, 
and,  apart  from  the  other  risks  of  such  a  journey, 
he  finds  himself  at  the  very  outset  perishing  with 
cold  and  hunger.  So  formidable  are  the  diffi- 
culties which  confront  these  fugitive  exiles,  that, 
of  all  those  who  escape  from  the  convict  stations, 
one-third  come  back  and  ask  to  be  readmitted, 
and  one-third  perish  in  the  forest,  the  remaining 
third  only  managing  to  maintain  themselves  in 
freedom. 

These  escaped  exiles — called  by  the  settlers 
hradyaga  or  varnahs — are  the  terror  of  the  Trans- 
Baikal  province.  They  are  said  to  number  not 
less  than  twenty  thousand.  One  by  one,  as  they 
manage  to  obtain  passports,  they  set  out  for 
Europe,  keepuig  well  hidden  by  the  forest  while 
following  the  direction  of  the  post-road.  Most 
are  content  to  run  the  risk  of  travelling  with 
forged  papers.  An  escaped  exile  who  is  deter- 
mined to  have  a  genuine  passport  must  murder, 
rob,  and  personate  a  man  who  has  one.  Such  a 
vamak  is  to  be  feared.  He  cannot  procure 
firearms,   but  has  taken   care  to  bring  a  knife 


204  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

with  him  from  the  prison,  and  that  suffices  for 
his  work.  Takmg  liis  stand  beside  the  forest 
road,  in  the  morning  or  evening  twiUght,  he 
awaits  his  opportunity,  and  then  springs  into  a 
tarantass  upon  some  soUtary  sleeping  traveller, 
cuts  his  throat,  appropriates  his  papers,  hides 
his  body  in  the  forest,  and  bribing  the  driver — 
who  is  probably  himself  an  exile — to  secrecy,  he 
continues  his  journey  with  the  post-horses  in 
the  dead  man's  name, 

I  passed  a  lonely  cottage  in  which,  only  a  day 
or  two  before,  a  peasant  and  his  wife  had  been 
murdered  for  the  sake  of  their  passports  by  one 
of  these  varnaks.  Every  traveller  I  met  in  that 
region  was  armed  ;  and  one  who  for  a  few  hundred 
miles  shared  my  tarantass,  always  sat  for  an 
hour  or  two  at  twilight,  revolver  m  hand,  looking 
down  at  the  road  from  his  side  of  the  conveyance. 
He  insisted  upon  me  doing  the  same  on  my  side, 
giving  only  one  direction  simple  and  precise  : 
'  Any  man  who  shows  himself  here  is  a  bradyaga, 
so  shoot  him  without  a  word.' 

Happily,  while  this  bloodthirsty  companion 
was  with  me,  we  met  no  one  ;  but  one  day  when 
travel  Img  alone  through  a  wild  part  of  the  Trans- 
Baikal  country,  at  about  three  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  I  awoke  with  a  start.  The  sky  was 
grey  with  the  early  dawn  ;  the  yemschik  was 
nodding  half-asleep  on  his  box  ;   the  horses  were 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK   TO   TOMSK     205 

pacing  lazily  along  the  track  ;  and  stepping  out 
towards  me  from  the  forest,  only  a  dozen  yards 
away,  was  as  desperate-looking  a  villain  as  any 
convict  gang  could  show.  He  abruptly  stopped 
at  the  first  sight  of  me,  and,  seeing  that  I  was 
prepared  for  him,  slunk  back  into  the  forest  and 
disappeared. 

Wliat  it  was  that  aroused  me  at  that  moment 
into  such  alert  wakefulness  must,  like  many 
similar  experiences  in  men's  lives,  be  left  as  an 
enigma, — unless  what  Dibdin's  ballad  says  of 
sailors  is  true  also  of  others,  and  that  travellers 
by  land  have  some  sleepless  unseen  attendant, 
like  the 

sweet  little  cherub  that  sits  up  aloft, 
To  keep  watch  for  the  life  of  poor  Jack. 

But  what  Russian  travellers  from  the  East  to 
Europe  were  that  year  specially  afraid  of  was, 
not  the  knife  of  the  assassin,  but  the  pestilence 
that  walketh  in  darkness  ;  for  the  rumour  had 
spread  abroad  that  cholera  had  broken  out  again 
in  Tobolsk  and  Tomsk,  and  the  post-road  crossed 
the  infected  region.  Central  and  Eastern  Siberia, 
except  on  the  coast  of  the  Pacific,  are  free  from 
epidemics  ;  and,  rigorous  as  is  the  climate,  it  is 
one  of  the  healthiest  in  the  world.  Some  of  the 
doctors  holding  Government  appointments  there 
complain  that  they  are  in  danger  of  forgetting  all 


206  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

the  practical  part  of  their  profession,  they  have 
BO  little  to  do.  The  air  on  the  Great  Plateau 
appears  to  be  too  cold  and  pure  and  dry  for  the 
germs  of  tubercle  ;  and  I  did  not  see  a  single 
case  of  pulmonary  consumption,  nor  even  hear 
of  one,  throughout  the  Amoor  and  Trans-Baikal 
provinces. 

Acute  inflammation  of  the  lungs  is  perhaps 
the  commonest  serious  disease,  but  it  either  kills 
its  victim  outright  in  a  few  days,  or  leaves  him 
with  his  breathing  apparatus  unimpaired.  Val- 
vular diseases  of  the  heart  also  occur  here,  and 
generally  run  a  rapid  course.  Owing  to  the 
large  amount  of  salt  fish  which  enters  into  their 
winter  dietary,  scurvy  sometimes  appears  among 
the  peasantry  ;  and  diseases  due  to  an  immoral 
life  are  not  only  found  among  the  Russian  settlers, 
but  have  been  communicated  by  them  to  the 
aborigines. 

Considering  the  amount  of  talk  which  has 
been  rife  in  England  on  the  subject  of  Siberian 
leprosy,  I  was  surprised  to  find  it  such  an  ex- 
tremely rare  disease.  I  inquired  for  it  every- 
where from  Vladivostock  to  the  Ural  Mountains, 
but  the  very  name  for  it  was  unfamiHar  to  or- 
dinary people,  and  I  did  not  meet  with  a  single 
leper  from  one  end  of  the  country  to  the  other. 
There  is  a  small  leper  settlement  among  the 
Yakuts  on  the  Lena,  and  another  near  the  coast, 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK   TO   TOMSK    207 

but  all  the  lepers  in  the  country,  according 
to  the  carefully  prepared  Government  register, 
number  less  than  seventy.  Being  so  few,  they 
are  well  provided  for  ;  and  the  poorest  of  them 
owns  a  cow  and  a  plot  of  land. 

It  was  stated  in  the  English  newspapers,  a 
few  years  ago,  that  somewhere  in  Siberia  a 
herb  had  been  discovered  which  was  a  specific 
for  this  terrible  disease,  and  a  successful  appeal 
was  made  for  subscriptions  to  send  a  costly  ex- 
pedition to  the  Lena  to  ascertain  what  this  herb 
might  be.  The  price  of  a  few  postage  stamps, 
and  a  letter  to  any  respectable  Russian  physician, 
would  have  elicited  the  information  that  the 
herb  referred  to  was  the  well-known  sarsaparilla, 
that  it  had  unaccountably  acquired  a  temporary 
reputation  as  a  cure  for  leprosy,  but  that,  after 
zealously  administering  it  for  a  considerable 
length  of  time  to  every  known  victim  of  this 
disease  in  Siberia,  with  no  improvement  what- 
soever, the  employment  of  this  herb  in  the 
treatment  of  leprosy  had  been  abandoned. 

It  was  probably  because  of  the  general  im- 
munity from  epidemic  diseases  enjoyed  by  Eastern 
Siberia  that  the  rumours  of  cholera  in  the  West 
created  such  alarm.  Several  of  my  fellow 
passengers  on  the  Amoor  steamer  were  so  dis- 
turbed by  the  reports  received,  that  they  gave 
up  the  journey,  and  postponed  their  return  to 


208  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

Europe  to  another  year.  The  prompt  and  vigor- 
ous measures  adopted  by  the  Central  Government 
to  cure,  if  not  prevent,  the  malady,  increased 
the  panic  of  the  people.  No  attempt  was  made 
to  warn  them  against  the  danger  of  drinking 
contaminated  water,  and  filters  in  Siberia  are 
unknown.  If  I  asked  for  water,  they  never 
brought  me  any  that  it  was  safe  to  drink. 
Sometimes  it  was  green,  and  sometimes  brown, 
and  always  tainted  with  decayed  organic  matter. 
But,  as  the  average  Siberian  peasant  only  uses 
water  to  dilute  his  vodka  and  infuse  his  tea, 
the  danger  may  have  been  less  serious  than  it 
seemed. 

There  was  no  stint  in  the  supply  of  disinfectants, 
and  around  every  post-station  between  Irkutsk 
and  Tomsk  there  was  always  a  strong  odour  of 
carbolic  acid.  Every  sniff  of  it  awakened  gloomy 
apprehensions  in  the  people  ;  but  what  disquieted 
them  most  was  the  rough  wooden  shed  which, 
by  Imperial  order,  had  been  erected  on  the  out- 
skirts of  every  town  and  village  as  a  hospital 
for  those  who  might  be  stricken  with  the  disease. 
Its  isolated  position,  and  the  new  white  deal 
boards  of  which  it  was  constructed,  made  it  a 
conspicuous  object  ;  but,  in  passing  the  first 
one  I  had  seen,  it  was  necessary  to  ask  the  yem- 
schik  what  it  was,  and  putting  his  hand  to  his 
mouth,  with  awe  in  his  look,  he  whispered  in  my 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK   TO   TOMSK    209 

ear — as  if  afraid  to  hear  his  own  voice  utter  it — 
the  one  word,  '  Cholera.' 

The  dread  of  this  mysterious  enemy  produced 
a  strange  effect  upon  the  superstitious  imagination 
of  the  people.  In  some  parts  of  the  country 
they  personified  the  evil,  expecting  to  see  it 
walk  into  the  settlement  in  human  form  ;  and  on 
one  occasion,  a  stranger,  who  appeared  suddenly 
in  a  village,  was  declared  to  be  the  cholera. 
The  villagers  at  once  seized  him,  and  he  was 
only  saved  from  a  violent  death  by  the  timely 
arrival  of  his  friends. 

Towards  the  middle  of  this  portion  of  the 
journey  I  sometimes  found  it  convenient  to  hire 
outside  horses.  They  were  cheaper  than  those 
supphed  at  the  post-station,  and  quite  as  good. 
Many  of  the  farmers  were  able  to  supply  us,  and 
some  of  them  were  so  anxious  to  earn  money  in 
this  way,  that  they  often  rode  out  several  miles 
from  the  settlement  to  meet  in-coming  travellers, 
and  strike  a  bargain  with  them  for  the  ensuing 
stage.  The  disadvantage  to  the  traveller  was 
that  tarantasses  could  only  be  obtained  at  the 
post-station,  and  if  he  went  elsewhere  for  horses 
he  had  to  be  content  with  a  telyega — one  of  the 
shallow,  open  wagons  already  described.  Such 
a  conveyance  is  bad  enough  in  the  daytime,  but 
is  almost  unendurable  at  night,  for,  however 
carefully  the  baggage  is  arranged,  it  is  impossible 

U 


2i0  ACROSS   SIBERIA 

to  find  a  position  in  which  we  can  sleep  securely, 
and  we  have  to  be  thankful  for  a  few  minutes  of 
semi-conscious  dozing  when  the  road  happens 
to  be  smooth. 

To  make  matters  worse,  there  was  one  night  a 
continual  fall  of  drizzling  rain,  which,  an  hour 
or  two  before  dawn,  culminated  in  a  violent 
thunderstorm.  It  burst  upon  us  suddenly — a 
few  premonitory  rumbles,  and  then  the  din  of 
universal  battle,  as  the  thunder,  peal  after  peal, 
crashed  and  roared  and  echoed  through  the  forest, 
while,  the  dome  of  darkness  round  about  us 
riven  by  the  concussion,  the  gleaming  fissures 
here  and  there  ran  down  its  ebon  walls,  only  to 
be  instantly  repaired. 

We  were  in  a  fine  position  to  see  it  all,  perched 
on  the  top  of  a  pile  of  baggage,  with  only  the 
sky  above  us,  and  the  wild  taiga  around.  And 
we  had  to  see  it  to  the  end,  for  neither  coaxing 
nor  imprecation  nor  any  amount  of  whip  could 
make  our  horses  face  the  rain  and  sleet  which 
the  wind  was  now  sweeping  furiously  along  our 
course.  At  first  there  was  a  sense  of  danger 
and  of  loneliness,  but  soon  the  impressiveness 
of  the  phenomena  made  us  forget  all  else — until, 
drenched  to  the  skin  with  the  cold  rain,  we 
became  conscious  only  of  intolerable  discom- 
fort ;  and  then,  at  last,  in  our  despair  we  too 
caught   the   defiant   mood  of  nature,   and   told 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK   TO   TOMSK     211 

the  contending  elements  to  do  their  worst,  we 
did  not  care. 

Four  hours  later  we  emerged  from  the  chaos 
of  the  storm,  and  of  the  forest,  to  see  before  us 
on  the  plain  a  settler's  homestead  ;  and  no  palace 
parlour  can  appear  more  cosy  to  a  king  than 
did  that  well-warmed  hut  to  me,  nor  can  the 
daintiest  dishes  at  a  banquet  be  more  inviting 
than  was  that  basin  of  hot  bread  and  milk. 

When  we  drove  forth  again,  the  winds  were 
hushed  and  the  birds  were  singing.  Before  us 
lay  the  flowery  beauty  of  the  steppe  ;  above  us 
was  the  calm  blue  sky  ;  around  us  everywhere 
the  genial  warmth  and  golden  glory  of  the  sun- 
shine ;  within  one  short  hour  pandemonium  had 
been  transformed  to  paradise — '  so  soon  a  smile 
of  God  can  change  the  world.' 

We  had  only  passed  two  small  towns,  Nijni- 
Udinsk  and  Kansk,  in  the  six  hundi'ed  miles  we 
had  already  travelled  from  Irkutsk,  but  we  had 
not  gone  far  this  morning  over  the  undulating 
plain  when  we  found  it  suddenly  sloping  down 
into  a  deep  broad  valley,  so  broad  that  the  high 
lands  on  the  other  side  of  it  appeared  only  hke 
a  sinuous  purple  line  on  the  horizon.  This  was 
the  valley  of  the  Yenisei  ;  but  the  great  river 
keeps  so  close  to  the  western  border  that  we  could 
hardly  see  it  at  this  distance,  and  could  only  be 
sure  of  its  position  by  the  city  of  Krasnoiarsk, 


212  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

which  stands  upon  its  banks,  and  whose  white 
church  towers,  illuminated  by  the  sunshine,  were 
distinctly  visible  some  twenty  miles  ahead.  We 
reached  the  river  in  a  couple  of  hours,  the  yem- 
schik  driving  down  into  the  valley  at  such  a  furious 
pace  that  when  one  of  our  horses  fell  the  two 
others  dragged  him  along  for  at  least  a  hundred 
yards  before  we  could  bring  them  to  a  stand. 

The  eastern  bank  of  the  Yenisei  was  quite 
busy  that  day  "with  a  traffic  representing  very 
adverse  interests.  Old  topers  would  have  been 
filled  with  a  hankering  desire  at  the  sight  of 
a  caravan  which  had  just  crossed  the  river — a 
caravan  of  vodka,  great  hogsheads  on  wheels, 
convejring  to  the  settlements  of  Eastern  Siberia 
the  strong  rye-spirit  of  which  Russians  are  so 
fond,  and  which  so  ill  repays  their  fondness. 
Members  of  temperance  societies  would  have 
been  delighted  to  see  there,  waiting  to  cross  over, 
a  caravan  of  nearly  a  hundred  cart-loads  of  tea 
on  its  way  from  China  to  Europe.  Those  who 
were  too  whimsical  to  look  with  any  favour  upon 
tea  might  yet  find  satisfaction  in  thinking  of  that 
simpler  beverage,  of  which  they  had  such  an 
inexhaustible  supply  in  the  clear  cold  water  of 
the  river. 

This  river  is  the  largest  in  Asia,  and  one 
of  the  five  or  six  largest  in  the  world.  Rising  on 
the  table-lands  of  Mongolia,  5,000  feet  above  the 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK  TO   TOMSK    213 

level  of  the  sea,  before  it  reaches  that  level  it 
must  run  a  course  of  more  than  3,000  miles. 
At  the  spot  where  I  crossed  it,  more  than  2,000 
above  its  entrance  to  the  Arctic  Ocean,  it  is  half 
a  mile  wide  ;  and  it  is  navigable  for  several 
hundred  miles  above  this  place,  steamers  running 
regularly  in  the  open  season  as  far  as  JMinusinsk, 
on  the  frontier  of  the  Chinese  Empire.  We 
crossed  the  river  with  our  horses  on  a  sort  of  raft 
— a  large  platform  supported  on  three  parallel 
boats,  and  which  was  swung  over  to  the  other 
side  by  the  force  of  the  current  acting  on  the 
pendulum  arrangement  already  described. 

The  province  through  which  this  river  runs  is 
named  from  it  Yeniseisk.  The  vastness  of  Siberia 
may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  this  one  pro- 
vince is  more  than  half  as  large  as  European 
Russia.  Krasnoiarsk  is  situated  on  the  western 
bank  of  the  river  ;  has  a  population  of  fifteen 
thousand  ;  and,  though  not  the  capital,  is  the 
largest  and  most  important  city  in  the  province. 
It  is  well  suppKed  with  churches,  and  their  tall 
painted  towers  serve  as  landmarks  for  long  dis- 
tances away  on  the  bordering  steppes.  The  city 
is  well  laid  out,  its  streets  are  straight  and  wide, 
and  it  has  a  considerable  number  of  substantial 
brick  buildings — residences,  offices,  and  shops. 
One  of  the  latter  is  known  as  '  The  Enghsh  Store,' 
a  name  which  irresistibly  attracted  me  to  visit 


214  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

it ;  but  none  of  the  people  about  it  now  are 
English,  and  its  present  claim  to  the  title  of 
'  English  Store  '  rests  only  on  the  stock  of  Bir- 
mingham hardware  it  has  for  sale.  But  the 
business  was  established  by  an  Englishman, 
and  until  quite  recently  was  in  his  charge.  He 
was  greatly  interested  in  the  efforts  made  to 
open  direct  sea-traffic  between  England  and 
Siberia,  and  when  the  enterprising  English  captain, 
who  has  been  the  pioneer  of  this  service,  arrived 
in  the  Yenisei  off  Krasnoiarsk,  the  owner  of  the 
*  English  Store  '  at  once  set  out  for  the  ship  to 
offer  his  congratulations,  but  his  boat  capsized 
and  he  was  drowned. 

Glass  and  soap  and  pottery-ware  are  manu- 
factured here,  and  there  are  some  large  tanneries  ; 
but  the  prosperity  of  the  city  and  its  neighbour- 
hood depends  mainly  on  the  mines  of  the  Yeniseisk 
taiga — the  best-paying  gold-fields  of  Siberia. 

It  is  intensely  cold  here  in  the  winter,  and 
the  low  temperature  is  made  more  trying  by  the 
strong  winds  which  then  prevail.  In  one  way 
these  winds  are  very  serviceable — they  keep 
the  streets  clear  of  snow,  sweeping  it  away  as 
fast  as  it  falls  ;  but  they  cannot  melt  the  ice, 
and  the  river  remains  frozen  over  for  about  half 
the  year, 

A  hundred  miles  west  of  the  Yenisei  we  crossed 
the  Tcholym.     At  certain  seasons  of  the  year 


THROUGH    IRKUTSK  TO   TOMSK     215 

this  river,  which  is  a  tributary  of  the  Obi,  is 
navigable  for  several  hundred  miles,  and  affords 
a  good  water-way  to  Tomsk ;  but  I  arrived 
too  early  in  the  year  for  this  mode  of  travel, 
and  so  had  to  continue  my  journey  with  horses 
as  before. 

The  little  town  of  Atchinsk,  where  the  post- 
road  meets  the  Tcholym,  is  the  centre  of  one  of 
the  principal  horse-breeding  districts  of  Siberia, 
and  these  animals  are  so  plentiful  and  cheap  that 
the  charge  for  hiring  them  at  the  Government 
post-stations  is  only  half  what  it  is  at  the  stations 
farther  east.  At  one  village,  where  the  stables 
of  the  post-station  happened  to  be  empty,  to 
save  delay  we  hired  from  a  farmer  a  team  of 
three  horses  and  a  telyega  for  the  next  stage  of 
about  twenty  English  miles,  and  the  total  charge 
for  horses,  vehicle,  and  driver  was  one  rouble — 
or  two  shillings  in  English  money. 

A  good  horse — equal  to  the  best  at  the  post- 
stations — could  be  purchased  for  £3  sterling. 
Cattle  were  equally  abundant.  The  average 
price  of  a  milch  cow  was  £1,  and  I  have  seen 
calves  a  few  weeks  old  sold  for  Is.  6d.  each.  There 
are  few  other  civilized  countries  in  the  world 
where  all  the  necessaries  of  life  can  be  obtained 
so  cheaply  as  here.  Ten  pounds  of  Russian 
bread  could  be  purchased  for  2ld.,  a  pound  of 
beef  or  mutton  for   Id.,  a  hundred  cucumbers 


216  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

for  2d.,  thirty-six  pounds  of  potatoes  for  2\d.y 
a  fowl  for  Ihd.,  a  duck  for  2\d.,  and  a  goose  for 
%d.  Fresh  eggs  were  regularly  sold  at  five  or 
six  for  \d.,  and  new  milk  at  a  halfpenny  per 
quart.  Most  of  the  settlers  build  their  own 
houses,  but  any  one  wishing  to  rent  a  substantial 
little  log  cottage  in  one  of  the  villages  could  do 
so  for  about  £1  sterling  per  year. 

This  is  a  poor  district  for  earning  money, 
though  such  a  good  one  for  economically  spending 
it.  The  population  is  not  nearly  so  sparse  as 
in  the  Amoor  and  Trans-Baikal  regions  ;  and 
though  the  soil  is  fertile,  and  a  small  fraction 
of  it  suffices  for  local  requirements,  it  is  impossible, 
in  the  absence  of  cheap  and  rapid  means  of 
transit,  to  find  a  market  for  the  surplus  produce. 
The  establishment  of  regular  steam  communica- 
tion between  the  Yenisei  and  Obi  Rivers  and 
the  chief  ports  of  Europe  would  greatly  enrich 
this  district,  and  at  the  same  time  confer  benefit 
upon  the  dense  populations  of  Western  Europe, 
by  placing  a  larger  wheat  supply  at  their  disposal, 
and  opening  new  markets  for  their  manufactures. 

A  considerable  proportion  of  the  present  popu- 
lation of  this  part  of  Siberia  are  Tartars.  Except 
in  the  large  towns  they  do  not  mingle  with  the 
Russian  settlers,  but  have  their  own  separate 
villages,  which  are  distinguished  by  a  special 
style  of  building,  and  a  central   mosque,  which 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK   TO   TOMSK    217 

looks  so  much  like  a  church,  that  I  had  seen  a 
considerable  number  of  them  before  I  noticed 
that  the  gilded  object  surmounting  the  tower 
was  a  crescent  and  not  a  cross. 

The  word  Tartar — or,  more  correctly,  Tata — • 
was  originally  the  special  designation  of  a  Mongol 
tribe  in  the  desert  of  Gobi,  but  was  thence  adopted 
by  the  people  of  the  West  as  a  convenient  term 
to  describe  the  composite  hordes  of  Turks  and 
Mongols  which  devastated  Eastern  Europe  six 
centuries  ago.  The  Manchurian  race  which  now 
rules  the  Chinese  Empire  is  often  spoken  of  in 
the  West  as  Tartar  ;  but,  as  generally  understood 
to-day,  the  Tartars  are  a  Turkish  people  mixed 
in  various  degrees  with  some  of  the  aboriginal 
races  of  Finland  and  Mongolia.  They  have 
crossed  the  Ural  Mountains,  and  formed  large 
settlements  in  European  Russia  ;  Kazan,  on  the 
Volga,  is  a  Tartar  city,  but  Siberia  is  their  native 
land.  From  the  banks  of  the  Lena,  where  they 
were  first  heard  of,  and  where  they  still  have 
the  important  township  of  Yakutsk,  they  have 
spread  over  a  considerable  area  of  the  province 
of  Yeniseisk  and  the  governments  of  Tomsk 
and  Tobolsk.  Most  of  them  are  engaged  in 
cattle-breeding  and  agriculture,  but  some  of 
them  travel  about  the  country  buying  and  selling 
various  kinds  of  merchandise,  and  some  are 
employed  as  artisans  in  the  larger  towns. 


218  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

The  Tartars  living  on  the  Lena,  and  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  3Iinusinsk  on  the  Upper  Yenisei, 
are  at  least  nominally  Christian  ;  but  the  great 
majority  of  the  Tartars  of  Siberia  are  Moham- 
medans. They  are  faithful  to  the  outward 
observances  of  their  religion,  dropping  down  on 
their  knees  to  pray  at  the  appointed  times, 
wherever  they  may  be,  and  in  whatever  com- 
pany ;  but  it  is  to  be  feared  that  in  most  cases 
their  religion  ends  with  these  observances,  which 
are  valued  not  so  much  as  a  means  of  virtue  as 
its  substitute. 

The  Tartar  men  are  moderately  tall,  broad- 
shouldered,  and  strong.  Their  eyes  and  hair 
are  black,  but  their  prominent  and  well-shaped 
noses  distinguish  them  at  once  from  their  Mon- 
golian neighbours,  and  are  strongly  suggestive 
of  Semitic  relationship. 

Closely  associated  with  the  Tartars  of  this 
region,  but  quite  distinct  from  them,  are  tribes 
of  another  aboriginal  people — the  Samoyedes. 
They  are  a  stunted  race,  and  their  round  fiat 
faces,  with  black  hair  and  eyes,  plainly  indicate 
their  Mongolian  affinities.  Within  the  last  few 
years  grave-mounds  have  been  discovered  near 
the  upper  waters  of  the  Yenisei,  and  from  these 
mounds  various  remains  of  the  Bronze  period 
have  been  unearthed,  together  with  a  number 
of  what  are  believed  to  be  Runic  inscriptions. 


THROUGH   IRKUTSK   TO   TOMSK     219 

These  relics  most  probably  belong  to  the  ancestors 
of  the  modern  Samoyedes,  who  have  many  tradi- 
tional references  to  this  region  as  the  early  home 
of  their  race.  The  Tartars  who  are  now  settled 
there  must  have  conquered  and  expelled  them, 
and  since  that  time  the  history  of  the  Samoyedes 
has  been  one  of  continual  degeneration  and 
impoverishment.  Once  not  only  successful  agri- 
culturists, with  a  very  effective  system  of  artificial 
irrigation,  but  enterprising  miners  and  skilful 
workers  in  bronze  and  gold,  they  have  quite  lost 
the  arts  of  their  ancient  civilization.  They  still 
cling  to  the  superstitions  of  Shamanism  ;  but 
their  character  is  marked  by  a  degree  of  firmness 
and  independence,  and  they  have  the  reputation 
of  being  honest  and  hospitable.  Most  of  them 
are  extremely  poor,  and  they  are  made  still 
poorer  by  the  avarice  of  Russian  and  Tartar 
traders  ;  while  their  fondness  for  ardent  spirits, 
and  the  ravages  of  smallpox,  are  reducing  their 
numbers  more  and  more,  and  threaten  their 
speedy  extermination. 

Before  I  reached  the  Obi  River  I  had  hired 
for  this  journey  not  less  than  360  horses.  Upon 
the  Avhole  they  served  me  well,  and  for  axles 
broken,  wheels  off,  horses  down,  and  other  acci- 
dents, the  blame  may  justly  rest  on  the  bad 
roads,  dark  nights,  and  furious  driving.  But, 
however  good  the  horses,  I  had  by  this  time  had 


220  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

quite  enough  of  this  kind  of  travel,  and  was 
more  than  ready  for  a  change. 

Westward  of  Marinsk — the  second  town  I  had 
seen  since  leaving  the  Yenisei — our  road  lay 
through  a  beautiful  country,  not  wild  like  the 
taiga,  but  suggestive  of  old  parks  in  England — 
broad  grassy  spaces,  backed  by  bossy  woods, 
and  cut  by  winding  streams.  Then  again  we 
entered  upon  a  stretch  of  treeless  steppe,  and  at 
about  two  o'clock  one  fine  June  morning  the 
yemschik  pulled  up  at  a  post-station  right  on  the 
brink  of  a  steep  descent  to  what  appeared  to  be 
an  interminable  plain.  In  the  dim  twilight  I 
could  see  that  the  slope,  and  the  adjoining  portion 
of  the  land  below,  were  covered  with  houses, 
and  I  knew  at  once,  before  the  yemschik  told 
me,  that  this  was  Tomsk  :  I  knew  it,  and  was 
glad,  for  here  the  long  ordeal  of  tarantass-riding 
was  at  an  end. 


CHAPTER  XI 

FROM  TOMSK  TO  THE  URAL  MOUNTAINS,  BY  RIVER 
AND  RAILWAY 

Tomsk  city  is  the  capital  of  a  government  of 
the  same  name,  and  which  covers  an  area  equal 
to  one  and  a  half  times  that  of  France.  It  is  a 
region  of  most  diversified  contour.  To  the  south 
is  a  mountainous  country,  with  snow-clad  peaks 
1,200  feet  in  height,  gorges  filled  with  glaciers, 
and  open  valleys  of  most  fertile  soil,  either  already 
under  cultivation,  or  persuasively  inviting  it 
by  the  beauty  and  fragrance  of  its  flora  and  the 
general  luxuriance  of  its  vegetable  life.  Around 
the  bases  of  the  mountains  to  the  northward 
spreads  an  undulating  plateau  200  miles  in 
breadth,  and  upwards  of  1,000  feet  above  the 
level  of  the  sea.  Its  surface  is  mostly  steppe- 
land,  and  comparatively  treeless  ;  but  around 
its  numerous  lakes  there  is  rich  pasturage,  and 
extensive  tracts  are  under  cultivation.  To  the 
northward  of  the  steppe  are  the  lowlands  around 
the    Obi    River,    continuous   with    the    swampy 

221 


222  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

tundra  which  skirts  the  Arctic  seas.  The  tran- 
sition from  one  region  to  another  is  abrupt.  As 
there  is  a  sudden  fall  from  the  peaks  of  the  Altai 
Mountains  to  the  plateau,  so  the  plateau  itself 
falls  suddenly  away  by  a  steep  declivity  to  the 
level  of  the  north-western  plains. 

The  city  of  Tomsk  lies  just  on  the  margin  of 
the  lowland,  hugging  a  portion  of  the  western 
foot  of  the  ascent  to  the  plateau,  so  that  in 
approaching  it  from  the  east — open  as  is  the 
surrounding  country — one  cannot  see  the  city 
until  quite  close  to  it.  There  is  nothing,  moreover, 
to  indicate  the  direction  in  which  it  lies  except 
the  road,  and,  as  this  is  a  mere  track  across  the 
steppe  which  a  fall  of  snow  may  obliterate,  a 
traveller  may  be  within  an  hour's  walk  of  the 
city  and  yet  lose  his  way  hopelessly.  During  the 
previous  winter  a  partyof  nearlya  hundred  return- 
ing emigrants  and  soldiers  thus  met  their  death, 
the  frozen  corj)ses  of  some  of  them  being  found 
within  three  miles  of  the  suburbs  of  the  city. 

This  city  is,  after  Irkutsk,  the  largest  in 
Siberia,  having  a  population  of  forty  thousand. 
It  has  been  well  laid  out,  and,  though  there  is 
nothing  striking  in  its  streets,  the  appearance 
of  the  whole  city,  with  its  white  houses  and 
numerous  churches,  as  seen  from  the  brow  of  the 
steppe  above  it,  is  both  cheerful  and  imposing. 
The    river    Ushaika,    spanned    by    a    well-made 


TOMSK   TO   THE  URAL   MOUNTAINS   223 

bridge,  runs  through  the  middle  of  the  city  to 
join  the  Tom,  a  fine  navigable  river,  which  can 
be  seen  winding  through  the  plain  beyond  the 
western  suburbs  on  its  way  to  the  still  larger  Obi. 

By  far  the  largest  building,  or  rather  series  of 
buildings,  in  Tomsk,  is  the  university — the  only 
one  in  Siberia.  It  was  opened  in  1889.  The 
buildings  had  been  completed  long  before,  but 
the  Government  was  so  afraid  of  the  heresies 
and  treasons  which  might  possibly  be  bred  and 
nurtured  there,  that  years  were  required  to 
screw  up  its  courage  to  the  risk  of  permitting  the 
inauguration  of  a  Siberian  university.  Further 
delay  was  occasioned  by  the  difficulty  of  obtaining 
professors.  There  appears  to  be  such  a  wide- 
spread horror  of  Siberia  among  educated  Russians, 
that  suitable  men  could  not  be  obtained  for  the 
various  chairs  except  by  offering  larger  salaries 
than  those  connected  with  similar  positions  in 
St.  Petersburg.  Even  to  obtain  students,  the 
regulations  had  to  be  made  much  less  stringent 
than  those  of  universities  in  European  Russia. 
The  medical  faculty  is  at  present  the  most 
completely  equipped. 

Almost  all  the  various  industries  of  Siberia 
are  represented  in  the  government  of  Tomsk  ; 
its  rivers  abound  with  fish,  and  its  forests  with 
game  ;  in  the  hilly  regions  of  the  south  there  is 
mining  for  gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones  ; 


224  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

in  the  wide  valleys  farmers  have  tens  of  thou- 
sands of  acres  of  fertile  land  under  cultivation  ; 
and  other  settlers  rear  great  herds  of  horses  and 
cattle  on  the  plains.  The  wealth  thus  acquired 
enriches  the  provincial  city,  whose  importance 
as  a  mercantile  centre  is  greatly  enhanced  by  its 
situation  between  the  water-way  to  the  Ural 
Mountains  and  the  post-road  to  the  Eastern 
provinces.  For  six  months  in  the  year,  by  the 
Obi  and  its  tributary  the  Irtish,  several  lines  of 
steamers  run  between  Tiumen  (the  terminus  of 
the  Ural  Mountains  Railway)  and  this  city,  which 
is  therefore  a  convenient  market  for  the  exchange 
of  European  and  Siberian  merchandise.  As  it 
is  at  Tomsk  where  emigrants  and  travellers 
usually  commence  their  land  journey  to  the  East, 
there  is  a  great  demand  for  carriages,  and  as 
many  as  fifty  thousand  sledges  and  tarantasses 
are  manufactured  in  the  city  every  year. 

The  voyage  from  Tomsk  to  the  Ural  Mountains 
usually  occupies  a  week,  but  the  steamer  by  which 
I  took  passage  had  a  barge  in  tow,  and  did  not 
therefore  progress  so  rapidly.  But  we  had  the 
current  with  us,  and  a  couple  of  hours  after 
leaving  had  reached  the  mouth  of  the  Tom  River, 
and  saw  around  us  the  broader  waters  of  the 
Obi.  The  elevated  table-land  and  bordering 
hills  soon  sank  below  the  horizon,  and  we  had 
on  every  side  of  us  the  beginning  of  the  great 


TOMSK  TO   THE  URAL  MOUNTAINS   225 

northern  plains.  The  country  was  so  flat  that 
we  could  see  nothing  beyond  the  river-banks, 
which  were  covered  with  forest  to  the  water's 
edge,  and,  at  the  distance  of  our  steamer,  seemed 
only  like  serrated  bands  of  green  and  purple 
separating  the  expanse  of  water  from  the  sky. 

In  the  Tom  River  we  saw  a  dozen  sturdy 
Russians  with  a  long  tow-line  hauling  a  large 
cargo-boat  up  towards  the  city,  just  as  Chinese 
boatmen  do  when  working  against  wind  and 
current.  Near  the  junction  of  this  river  with  the 
Obi  was  an  immense  raft  of  pine-logs,  which  was 
being  ingeniously  carried  up  the  stream  by  means 
of  a  cable,  one  end  of  which  was  attached  to  an 
anchor  fixed  half  a  mile  or  so  ahead,  and  the 
other  to  a  capstan  worked  by  four  horses  on  the 
fore-part  of  the  raft.  When  the  raft  had  nearly 
reached  the  anchor,  a  second  one,  with  another 
length  of  cable,  was  sent  ahead  in  a  small  boat,  and, 
as  soon  as  it  was  fixed  at  the  required  distance,  the 
horses  began  again  to  turn  the  capstan.  A  still 
larger  raft  was  seen  a  few  hours  later ;  it  must  have 
measured  from  six  to  eight  hundred  feet  in  length, 
and  had  a  capstan  with  four  horses  at  each  end. 

After  the  first  day  we  saw  neither  rafts  nor 
boats  of  any  kind.  Every  hundred  miles  we 
stopped  at  a  lonely  wood-station  to  take  in  fuel, 
and  generally  from  one  wood-station  to  another 
was    an    unbroken    solitude.     Little    groups    of 

15 


226  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

islands  here  and  there  appeared,  and  sometimes 
we  saw  smaller  tributary  rivers  flowing  into 
ours  ;  but,  apart  from  these,  there  was  nothing 
but  the  increasing  broadness  of  the  river  to  in- 
dicate that  we  were  not  to-day  passing  precisely 
the  same  place  we  passed  yesterday. 

At  one  wood-station,  where  our  steamer  was 
moored  for  the  night,  I  had  an  opportunity  of 
visiting  a  camp  of  Ostiaks — another  interesting 
tribe  of  Siberian  aborigines,  once  very  numerous 
in  the  country,  but  now  rapidly  succumbing  to 
the  ravages  of  vodka  and  the  venom  of  Russian 
sensuality. 

Some  of  these  Ostiaks  are  working  as  agri- 
culturists upon  the  southern  steppes  ;  others, 
scattered  over  the  northern  tundra,  keep  herds 
of  reindeer  ;  but  the  purest  specimens  of  the 
race  are  those  engaged  m  fishing  on  the  Obi. 
They  are  a  diminutive  people,  the  average  height 
of  the  men  being  about  five  feet,  and  that  of  the 
women  six  inches  less.  They  have  dark-brown 
hair,  small  eyes,  broad  flat  noses,  thick  lips, 
and  scanty  beard.  Their  clothing  consisted  of 
trousers,  tunics,  and  mocassins  of  reindeer  skin  ; 
and  they  lived  in  huts  of  birch-bark,  some  of 
them  conical  in  shape,  like  an  Indian  wigwam. 

Birch-bark  is  not  only  used  by  the  Ostiaks 
for  house-building  ;  beaten  until  it  is  soft  and 
supple,   it  serves   them  for  blankets  and  outer 


TOMSK   TO  THE  URAL  MOUNTAINS   227 

garments  ;  and  whatever  baskets,  milk-basins, 
and  clothes-boxes  they  have  are  made  of  the 
same  material.  The  inner,  smooth  surface  of 
the  bark,  which  forms  the  outside  of  the  boxes, 
is  often  ornamented  with  quaint  lines  and  figures, 
which  have  evidently  been  burnt  into  the  tissue 
with  a  red-hot  piece  of  iron  or  stone.  Some 
of  these  boxes,  about  a  foot  in  length,  and  very 
neatly  made,  were  offered  for  sale  at  what  some 
of  my  fellow  passengers  considered  the  exorbitant 
price  of  ten  kopeks,  or  2^.  each. 

It  is  said  of  the  Ostiaks,  by  those  who  know 
them  well,  that,  in  spite  of  the  hardships  of  their 
life,  they  are  honest  and  kind  ;  and  from  the 
little  I  saw  of  them,  I  can  well  believe  that  such 
praise  is  deserved.  Their  religion,  like  that  of 
most  other  native  races  in  Siberia,  is  Shamanism. 
Efforts  have  again  and  again  been  made  to  con- 
vert them  to  Christianity,  or  rather  something 
has  been  done  with  this  end  in  view  ;  it  hardly 
amounts  to  effort.  Simple  as  is  the  life  of  a 
Siberian  priest,  he  could  not,  without  a  good 
deal  of  self-denial,  spend  any  considerable  length 
of  time  among  such  people  as  the  Ostiaks  ;  and 
therefore,  if  ordered  by  his  bishop  to  go  and 
convert  a  tribe  of  them,  he  contents  himself 
with  making  a  bonfire  of  their  idols,  administering 
the  rite  of  baptism,  and  distributing  some  small 
silver  coins. 


228  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

When  the  priest  has  left  them,  the  poor,  iin- 
instructed  people,  feeling  lonely  without  their 
fetiches,  begin  at  once  to  manufacture  now 
ones.  There  is  no  time  for  elaborate  carving, 
so,  getting  an  ordinary  board,  they  burn  with 
a  hot  iron,  upon  one  end  of  it,  the  rough  image 
of  a  face — eyes,  nose,  and  mouth  ;  and  this 
serves  as  their  mediating  divinity,  the  link 
between  themselves  and  the  spirit-world,  until 
a  priest  happens  to  come  round  again. 

The  great  defect  in  the  missionary  agencies 
of  Russia,  as  indeed  in  all  the  ministrations  of 
the  State  Church  itself,  is  the  lack  of  instruction. 
The  ritual  of  the  Church  is  believed  to  be  sufficient, 
and  an  intelligent  conception  of  the  spiritual 
meaning  of  the  rites  a  matter  of  very  subordinate 
importance. 

Converts  are  being  slowly  made  among  the 
Buriats  of  the  Trans-Baikal  province  ;  but  the 
only  great  success  I  have  heard  of  in  connexion 
with  the  missionary  operations  of  the  Russian 
Church  is  the  conversion  of  the  Tartar  tribes 
upon  the  Lena.  The  method  adopted  in  this 
case,  though  so  successful,  is  hardly  likely  to 
commend  itself  to  the  missionary  societies  of 
Britain,  but  it  illustrates  the  Russian  notion 
of  evangelism,  and  shows  not  only  a  shrewd 
knowledge  of  human  nature,  but  a  readiness  to 
take  advantage  of  its  weaknesses.     Instead  of 


TOMSK  TO  THE  URAL  MOUNTAINS  229 

sending  a  band  of  missionaries  to  live  among 
them,  and  lead  tliem  step  by  step  into  the  light 
of  Christian  truth,  a  decree  of  State  was 
passed,  and  transmitted  by  Imperial  messenger, 
informing  these  Lena  Tartars  that,  in  recognition 
of  their  loyalty  and  good  behaviour,  the  Czar  had 
by  special  edict  graciously  conceded  to  them 
the  privilege  of  being  admitted  to  the  Imperial 
Church ;  that  a  band  of  instructors  was  on  the 
way  to  prepare  them  for  the  initiatory  rites  ;  and 
that,  at  any  early  date,  such  of  them  as  had  pro- 
fited by  their  mstruction  would  be  baptized. 

The  bait  was  successful.  The  Tartars  felt 
themselves  so  flattered  by  this  mark  of  the 
Czar's  favour,  that  the  whole  tribe  applied  for 
admission  to  the  Church. 

As  we  proceeded  northward  the  June  days 
lengthened  until,  when  we  had  passed  the  latitude 
of  60°,  there  was  no  night  at  all.  The  sun  just 
dipped  below  the  horizon,  but  the  sunset  glory 
never  faded,  and  as  banners  waving  above 
hedgerows  indicate  the  progress  of  an  unseen 
procession,  so  the  golden  splendours  of  the 
evening  followed  the  sun's  movement  round 
the  north  until  again  they  brightened  into  day. 
Because  there  was  no  darkness,  we  seemed  for 
a  while  to  become  oblivious  of  the  time,  whether 
of  day  or  night.  Walking  up  and  down  on  the 
shore  at  a  wood-station  one  day,  I  found  it  was 


230  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

two  o'clock  in  the  morning.  Not  having  been 
accustomed  since  infancy  to  go  to  bed  by  daylight, 
I  was  waiting  for  the  familiar  curtains  to  be 
drawn.  When  I  woke  and  called  for  breakfast 
it  was  afternoon,  and  all  the  rest  of  my  fellow 
passengers  were  still  asleep. 

The  confluence  of  the  Obi  with  the  Irtish  was 
the  limit  of  our  voyage  northward,  and  turning 
into  the  latter  river  we  began  to  steam  again 
towards  the  south. 

The  Irtish,  though  smaller  than  the  Obi,  is  a 
magnificent  river,  running  a  course  of  2,500 
miles,  three-fourths  of  which  is  navigable.  The 
scenery  around  the  lower  portions  of  its  course  is 
similar  to  that  upon  the  Obi — bright  water  and 
blue  sky,  with  an  intervening  strip  of  low  forest- 
covered  bank ;  but,  the  river  being  confined  in 
a  narrower  channel,  the  trees  on  either  side,  and 
any  bit  of  rising  ground,  seem  much  larger,  and 
do  more  to  relieve  the  flatness  of  the  landscape. 

The  current  was  against  us  now,  and,  having 
the  broad,  heavy-laden  barge  in  tow,  our  speed 
was  considerably  slackened.  But  wo  never 
stopped  except  to  take  in  fuel,  and  on  the  fourth 
day  after  entering  the  Irtish  we  turned  from 
it  into  the  River  Tobol,  which  soon  brought  us 
to  the  city  of  Tobolsk.  It  had  been  in  sight 
for  several  hours  before  we  reached  it,  the  river 
here  running  a  very  winding  cour.re,  and  the  city 


TOMSK  TO   THE  URAL  MOUNTAINS   231 

being  made  conspicuous  by  its  situation  on  the 
top  of  an  isolated  crag — a  peculiar  rocky  plat- 
form, which  rises  two  hundred  feet  above  the 
surrounding  plain. 

Tobolsk  is  the  oldest  city  in  Siberia,  dating 
from  the  middle  of  the  reign  of  our  Queen  Eliza- 
beth, and  it  has  an  ancient,  settled  look.  The 
population  does  not  exceed  fifteen  thousand, 
and  is  not  increasing  ;  but  the  streets  being 
wide,  and  separated  from  one  another  by  open 
spaces  of  grass-land,  the  city  occupies  a  large 
area,  spreading  itself  out  beyond  the  surface 
of  the  rock,  to  cover,  with  its  poorer  suburbs, 
most  of  the  flat  between  it  and  the  river. 

In  going  from  the  steamer  to  the  centre  of 
the  town  we  passed  through  busy  streets  of 
little  open-fronted  shops,  where  small  traders — 
many  of  them  Jews — offered  for  sale  various 
kinds  of  Siberian  produce,  among  which  was  a 
very  miscellaneous  assortment  of  tanned  and 
untanned  skins.  The  side- walks  are  paved  with 
planks,  which  bend  and  rattle  beneath  our 
feet,  and  look  so  worn  that  they  cannot  be  very 
frequently  renewed.  In  the  middle  of  the  city 
is  a  square,  one  side  of  which  is  occupied  by  an 
immense  prison  with  accommodation  for  two 
thousand  prisoners.  It  is  chiefly  used  as  a  place 
of  temporary  detention  for  exiles  on  their  way 
to  the  East. 


232  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

One  of  the  strangest  exiles  ever  sent  out  to 
Siberia  has  been  located  for  more  than  two 
centuries  in  this  city — the  bell  of  the  church 
at  Uglitch,  which  had  the  audacity  to  ring  an 
alarm  when  Boris  Godunoff,  to  secure  for  himself 
the  throne,  was  accomplishing  the  murder  of 
his  nephew  the  Czarowitz  Dmitri. 

Around  these  emblems  of  the  rigorous  govern- 
ment of  an  autocratic  Czar,  twenty-one  churches 
and  two  cathedrals  remind  the  people  of  the 
overruling  power  of  God.  Mental  culture  is  by  no 
means  disregarded,  for  the  city  has  in  its  museum 
a  good  collection  of  aboriginal  implements,  natural 
history  specimens,  and  paleontological  remains. 
There  are  also  several  educational  establishments 
of  good  repute  ;  and  most  of  the  girls'  schools 
in  Siberia  are  indebted  for  their  teachers  to  the 
Marie  Training  Institution  of  Tobolsk. 

This  city  does  a  considerable  trade  in  timber 
and  salt  fish,  but  its  commercial  importance 
depends  mainly  on  its  corn  market  ;  and  the 
small  and  comparatively  stationary  number  of 
inhabitants  in  what  was  once  the  capital  of 
Siberia,  and  is  still  the  chief  city  of  its  most 
populous  province,  arises  from  the  fact  that  by 
far  the  larger  portion  of  the  settlers  are  engaged 
in  agricultural  pursuits.  It  could  not  easily  be 
otherwise,  for  the  vast  province  of  Tobolsk,  with 
an  area  equal  to  at  least  six  times  that  of  Great 


TOMSK  TO   THE   URAL  MOUNTAINS   233 

Britain,  consists  almost  entirely  of  alluvial  plains, 
the  only  exceptions  being  the  rocky  northern 
extremity  of  the  Ural  Mountains,  and  a  few  such 
lonely  crags  as  that  upon  which  this  city  stands. 

The  great  plain  which  we  saw  on  either  side 
of  the  river,  and  which  is  known  as  the  Tobol 
Steppe,  comprises  twenty-five  millions  of  acres 
of  rick  black  soil,  and  is  one  of  the  most  fertile 
tracts  of  country  in  the  world.  Of  the  one 
and  a  half  millions  of  people  in  the  province  of 
Tobolsk,  about  one  million  are  settled  on  this 
steppe  ;  and  the  district  is  said  to  be  more 
characteristically  Russian  than  the  plains  on 
the  banks  of  the  Volga. 

The  climate  is  trying  to  the  settlers,  but  not 
detrimental  to  the  crops,  for,  though  the  winters 
are  terribly  severe,  the  sun  in  the  summer  shines 
through  the  clear,  dry  atmosphere  with  such 
unusual  power,  that  wheat  and  other  cereals 
come  to  maturity  with  a  rapidity  which  would 
astonish  Western  cultivators.  The  area  now 
under  tillage  on  this  steppe  amounts  to  about  three 
and  a  half  millions  of  acres,  by  far  the  greater  part 
of  its  fertile  surface  still  waiting  for  the  plough. 
There  are  other  steppes  of  similar  fertility  and 
almost  equal  size  ;  and  the  total  arable  surface 
of  this  province  is  so  extensive,  that  if  only 
half  of  it  were  utilized,  enough  wheat  could  be 
produced  to  supply  all  Europe  with  bread. 


234  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

These  fertile  steppes  are  in  the  southern  half 
of  the  Tobolsk  government ;  farther  north  we 
passed  through  a  very  different  region — a  region 
still  of  alluvial  soil,  but  spread  out  in  those  vast 
quivering  morasses  which  form  the  dreadful 
urmans  of  Siberia.  For  hundreds  of  miles  this 
region  is  covered  with  forest ;  gigantic  cedars, 
larches,  pines,  crowded  together  in  the  marsh, 
the  space  between  them  filled  with  such  dense 
growths  of  underwood  that  even  in  the  winter, 
when  hard  frost  gives  solid  standing-ground, 
without  a  hatchet  to  clear  the  way,  progress  is 
impossible. 

Outside  the  forest  areas  are  immense  level 
tracts  of  open  country  covered  with  a  grassy 
carpet  of  the  tender  est  green,  varied  by  flowery 
patches  of  white  and  gold  and  pink  and  purple, 
and  all  so  smooth,  and  fresh,  and  beautiful,  as 
if  inviting  the  traveller  to  wander  there.  But 
such  invitation  is  a  delusion  and  a  snare.  Only 
in  the  winter  can  these  flowery  meads  be  visited, 
and  then  they  are  no  longer  flowery  ;  but  to 
attempt  to  traverse  them  in  summer,  except 
with  special  apparatus,  means  being  sucked 
down  alive  into  the  grave. 

Even  to  wild  animals  these  urmans  are 
forbidden  ground.  The  nimble-stepping,  broad- 
hoofed  reindeer  can  sometimes  cross  them  safely 
in  the  summer-time,  but  most  other  large  animals 


TOMSK  TO   THE  URAL  MOUNTAINS    235 

attempting  to  do  so  would  quickly  be  engulfed, 
and  this  may  be  a  partial  explanation  of  the 
remains  of  mammoth  and  rhinoceros  which  are 
so  abundant  and  so  widely  diffused  through 
these  northern  marshlands  of  Siberia. 

In  the  museum  here  at  Tobolsk  are  numerous 
specimens  of  mammoth,  and  throughout  this 
region  they  are  by  no  means  rare.  When  an 
ice-pack  breaks  down  a  river-bank,  or  floods 
tear  up  a  frozen  marsh,  or  the  summer  thaw 
penetrates  a  little  more  deeply  than  usual  into 
the  ground,  some  of  these  antediluvian  monsters 
are  sure  to  be  exposed.  In  many  cases  they 
are  so  fresh  and  well  preserved,  with  their  dark 
shaggy  hair  and  underwool  of  reddish  brown, 
their  tufted  ears  and  long  curved  tusks,  that 
all  the  aborigines,  and  even  some  of  the  Russian 
settlers,  persist  in  the  belief  that  they  are 
specimens  of  animals  which  still  live,  burrowing 
under  ground  like  moles,  and  which  die  the 
instant  they  are  admitted  to  the  light. 

The  farther  one  goes  northward  the  more 
abundant  do  these  remains  become.  They  are 
washed  up  with  every  tide  upon  the  Arctic 
shores,  and  some  extensive  islands  off  the  coast 
seem  to  consist  almost  entirely  of  fossil  ivory 
and  bones.  Tusks  which  have  been  long  or 
repeatedly  exposed  to  the  air  are  brittle  and 
unserviceable,   but   those  which   have  remained 


236  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

buried  in  the  ice  retain  the  qualities  of  recent 
ivory,  and  are  a  valuable  article  of  merchandise. 
There  is  a  great  market  for  these  mammoth  tusks 
at  Yakutsk,  on  the  Lena,  from  which  they  find 
their  way  not  only  to  the  workshops  of  European 
Russia,  but  even  to  the  ivory  carvers  of  Canton. 

Various  trinkets  and  works  of  art  are  made 
of  these  remains,  and  are  sold  at  the  shops, 
and  especially  at  the  museum  of  Tobolsk,  as 
mementoes  of  a  visit  to  this  graveyard  of  the 
mammoth.  One  of  the  favourite  curios  very 
accurately  resembled  a  slice  of  Russian  bread 
and  cheese.  But  the  bread  was  really  a 
transverse  section  of  one  of  the  long  bones  of 
a  mammoth,  and  the  cheese  was  a  piece  of  ivory 
from  his  tusk  ;  the  two  thus  joined  together 
being  sold  at  a  price  which  enabled  the  ingenious 
contriver  to  obtain  for  himself  many  times  their 
weight  of  the  homely  fare  they  simulated. 

This  paludal  region  of  Tobolsk  is  not  altogether 
uninhabited.  Ostiak  hunters  roam  over  it  in 
winter  in  search  of  pelts,  and  even  in  summer 
a  few  of  them  contrive,  with  something  like 
snow-shoes  on  their  feet,  to  penetrate  for  twenty 
or  thirty  miles  into  these  swampy  wilds.  I 
saw  one  day  a  pair  of  wild  swans  rise  from  the 
water,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Irtish,  and  sail 
far  away  over  the  marshes.  As  from  time  to 
time  they  stretched  their  long  necks  to  inspect 


TOMSK  TO  THE  URAL  MOUXTAINS    237 

the  country  over  which  they  flew,  they  must 
sometimes  have  seen  human  dwellers  there,  and 
with  eyes  so  keen  as  theirs  have  recognized  that 
they  were  not  Ostiaks,  but  white-faced  Europeans. 

For  some  of  the  best  of  Russian  Noncon- 
formists, goaded  to  distraction  by  oppression, 
and  wishful  both  to  be  true  to  their  convictions 
and  to  preserve  their  liberty,  have,  by  toilsome 
winter  explorations,  discovered  patches  of  dry 
land  in  these  swamps,  and,  joined  by  such  of  their 
relatives  and  friends  as  v/ere  like-minded,  bringing 
with  them  a  few  cattle  and  bushels  of  seed-corn, 
here  they  have  settled  with  their  families,  and, 
protected  by  these  impenetrable  wastes  of  urman, 
fear  no  more  either  the  eye  of  the  informer  or  the 
hand  of  arbitrary  power.  Only  the  wild  swans 
know  where  they  are,  and  they  will  tell  no  tales. 

Three  new  passengers  joined  us  at  Tobolsk — 
young  men  of  about  twenty  years  of  age — sons 
of  Russian  settlers  at  Omsk,  and  who,  having 
completed  their  course  at  the  gymnasium,  were 
now  on  their  way  to  the  University  of  St.  Peters- 
burg. If  they  were  at  all  typical  of  the  educated 
youth  of  Russia,  the  prospects  of  the  empire 
are  bright.  While  frank,  honest,  and  hght- 
hearted,  they  had  the  reverence  which  taught 
them  to  take  their  shoes  off  their  feet  when 
approaching  holy  ground.  By  no  means  deficient 
in  intelligence  or  manly  independence,  they  yet 


238  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

showed  none  of  that  siiperciHousness  on  the  one 
hand,  nor  of  morbid  self-consciousness  upon  the 
other,  which  mar  the  disposition  of  so  many  of 
the  same  class  of  young  men  in  England. 

One  of  them  played  the  violin  \vith  rare  taste 
and  proficiency,  and  all  three  were  aspiring 
vocahsts — if  aspiring  be  an  appropriate  word  to 
represent  their  evident  desire  to  reach  a  lower 
note  than  any  other  bass  singer  in  the  world. 
The  first  thing  in  the  morning,  the  last  at  night, 
and  many  times  during  the  day,  one  or  another 
of  them  might  be  heard  and  seen  attempting  to 
run  or  rumble  down  the  gamut — deeper  and 
yet  deeper  still,  from  a  groan  to  a  roar,  from 
this  to  distant  thunder,  and  then  a  fall  to  vocal 
depths  which  were  quite  inaudible  ;  the  only 
sign  that  the  singer  was  still  singing  being  his 
attitude  and  his  grimace. 

A  voyage  of  three  days  up  the  Tobol  brought 
us  to  its  confluence  with  the  Toora,  a  small 
navigable  river  which  runs  down  from  the  Ural 
Mountains.  The  river  systems  of  Siberia  are 
remarkable  for  their  numerous  confluences,  and 
the  facilities  for  inland  navigation  thus  afforded 
explain  the  wide  dissemination  throughout  the 
country  of  Russian  settlements.  With  the  ex- 
ception of  the  Amoor,  all  the  great  rivers  of 
Siberia  run  from  south  to  north,  but  each  of 
them  is  formed  by  the  union  of  two  other  navigable 


TOMSK  TO  THE  URAL  MOUNTAINS    239 

rivers  ;  and  the  course  of  a  Siberian  river  system, 
as  shown  upon  a  map,  may  be  roughly  represented 
by  an  inverted  Y.  Each  of  these  confluent 
rivers  receives  its  own  navigable  tributaries, 
the  general  direction  of  whose  course  is  east 
and  west, — and  thus  regions,  not  only  far  apart, 
but  in  all  sorts  of  directions,  are  brought  into 
communication  ;  so  that  at  certain  seasons  of 
the  year,  with  a  suitable  boat,  the  whole  of 
Siberia  might  be  crossed  from  the  Pacific  Ocean 
to  the  Ural  Moimtains,  with  only  a  few  days' 
interval  of  land  travel. 

The  present  voyage  commenced  upon  the 
River  Tom,  from  the  Tom  we  passed  into  the 
Obi,  from  the  Obi  to  the  Irtish,  from  the  Irtish 
to  the  Tobol,  and,  last  of  all,  from  the  Tobol  to 
the  Toora — travelling  for  considerable  distances 
up  or  down  these  five  rivers  without  a  single 
change  of  steamer. 

A  fine  country  lay  around  us  as  we  steamed 
up  the  Toora  River.  Farmsteads  and  villages 
were  continually  in  sight,  surrounded  by  culti- 
vated fields,  or  tracts  of  meadow-land  on  which 
large  numbers  of  cattle  and  horses,  and  some- 
times sheep,  were  grazing  ;  and  there  was  nothing 
but  the  architecture  of  the  churches  to  remind 
us  that  we  were  not  in  some  of  the  rural  districts 
of  Western  Europe. 

The  barge  we  had  in  tow  was  left  behind  in  the 


240  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

Tobol,  so  we  made  more  rapid  progress  now ;  and 
towards  the  end  of  June,  two  days  after  entering 
the  Toora,  and  twelve  days  after  leaving  Tomsk, 
we  finished  our  voyage  at  the  city  of  Tiumen. 

The  river  here  is  about  as  wide  as  the  Thames 
at  Richmond.  On  its  left  or  northern  bank  is 
a  low-lying  plain,  covered  near  the  river  with 
the  huts  of  the  poorer  settlers.  A  bridge  connects 
tliis  district  with  the  city,  which  lies  on  the 
south  side  of  the  river,  covering  the  slopes  of 
a  somewhat  steep  ascent  to  the  plateau  and  a 
considerable  area  of  the  plateau  itself.  Most 
of  the  houses  are  built  of  wood,  but  they  look 
neat  and  comfortable,  and  many  of  them  are 
surrounded  by  gardens. 

This  city  is  almost  as  old  as  Tobolsk,  and 
has  not  only  a  larger  population,  but  its  citizens 
are  reputed  to  be  the  best-looking  people  in  the 
country.  But  this  does  not  mean  much  ;  for 
however  kind  and  honest  and  intelligent  and 
persevering  the  people  of  Siberia  may  be,  an 
unprejudiced  observer  can  hardly  overlook  the 
fact  that  nature  seems  to  have  fashioned  their 
features  into  harmony  with  the  rugged  aspects 
of  the  country  in  which  they  live. 

As  a  trading  city,  Tiumen  is  only  outrivaUed 
by  Irkutsk  and  Tomsk,  and  the  enterprising 
industry  of  its  inhabitants  has  made  it  an  im- 
portant manufacturing  centre.     It  has  the  only 


TOMSK  TO  THE  URAL  MOUNTAINS    241 

paper  mill  in  the  country.  The  coarse  carpets 
woven  in  this  city  are  finding  their  way  as  Oriental 
curiosities  into  the  markets  of  the  West,  There 
are  over  a  hundred  tanneries,  and  Tinmen  leather 
is  found  in  all  parts  of  the  country  ;  but  a  con- 
siderable number  of  the  hides  prepared  here 
are  used  in  the  town  itself,  which  turns  out 
every  year  not  less  than  seventy  thousand  pairs 
of  top-boots  and  three  hundred  thousand  pairs 
of  leather  gloves. 

But  to  emigrants  and  travellers  Tiumen  is 
chiefly  interesting  as  the  first  place  of  embarka- 
tion on  the  navigable  rivers  of  Siberia,  and  the 
eastern  terminus  of  the  railway  across  the  Ural 
Mountains.  The  station  is  two  miles  distant 
from  the  town,  and  is  an  imposing  building  of 
red  brick,  much  too  large  for  the  requirements 
of  present  traffic,  which  is  limited  to  one  arrival 
and  one  departure  every  twenty-four  hours. 

Our  train  left  a  Uttle  before  midnight,  and  it 
took  us,  even  by  railway,  two  nights  and  a  day 
to  reach  the  Kama  River,  on  the  western  side 
of  the  range.  It  was  tantalizing  to  commence 
this  journey  in  the  dark — being  impatient  for 
a  look  at  the  mighty  range  of  mountains  which 
has  been  the  scene  of  so  many  romantic  stories. 
Information  received  in  later  days  had  tended 
to  abate,  or  to  destroy,  the  awe  with  which  one 
had  been  taught  to  think  of  the  Ural  Mountains, 

16 


242  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

but  I  still  half  expected  to  see  something  of  the 
dreadful  precipices,  dizzy  heights,  "wild  gorges, 
and  gloomy  caverns  of  which  I  had  so  often  heard. 

Nothing  could  be  seen  from  the  train,  for  the 
night  was  dark,  and  the  lights  in  the  carriage 
made  the  outside  darker  still  ;  so  at  length, 
tired  of  looking,  I  fell  into  a  sound  sleep,  and 
did  not  wake  again  until  after  dawn.  Sure  of 
having  a  good  view  of  the  Urals  now,  I  hastened 
to  the  outside  platform  at  the  end  of  the  carriage, 
but  it  appeared  that  we  had  not  reached  the 
mountains  yet,  for  whichever  way  I  looked  I 
could  see  nothing  of  them.  What  I  did  see,  as 
I  sat  and  watched,  was  a  forest  of  fir-trees,  with 
dense  undergrowth  of  bushes,  close  up  to  the 
line  on  either  side,  and,  at  intervals  of  half  a 
dozen  miles  or  more,  a  quaint  little  wooden 
station,  looking  smaller  than  it  was  because  of 
the  tall  cedars  which  stood  round  it.  Then 
came  a  break  in  the  forest,  and  the  line  passed 
through  rolling  plains  of  luxuriant  grass-land, 
sloping  down  gently  here  and  there  into  a  hollow 
through  which  some  peaceful  river  flowed,  its 
waters  almost  hidden  sometimes  by  the  groves 
of  willow,  alder,  and  wild  cherry  on  its  banks  ; 
and  then  the  shadow  of  the  forest  fell  upon  the 
line  again. 

Some  rain  had  fallen  in  the  night,  and  the 
vegetation  had  enjoyed  it,  as  the  beauty  and 


TOMSK  TO   THE  URAL  MOUNTAINS    243> 

freshness  of  its  many  shades  of  green  this  morning- 
showed.     There  was  plenty  of  interesting  scenery, 
but   no   Ural   Mountains.     I   strained   my   neck 
out  of  the  window  to  look  ahead,  but  there  was- 
nothing  between  the  verdure  and  the  sky. 

Having  another  twenty-four  hours  of  railway- 
ride  before  us,  I  comforted  myself  with  the  reflee- 
tion  that  we  should  reach  the  awful  mountains- 
by-and-by  ;  but  soon  we  approaclied  a  busy  town, 
and  as  our  train  drew  up  at  the  station  I  saw 
with  astonishment  that  it  was  Ekaterinburg — a 
town  which  is  represented  on  the  map  as  being 
only  350  feet  below  the  summit  of  the  range. 

'  Where  are  the  Ural  Mountains  !  '  exclaimed 
a  fellow  passenger  of  whom  I  had  ventured  to 
inquire.  '  Why,  unless  you  have  been  looking 
at  the  sky,  you  have  seen  nothing  else  all  da.y.' 

The  Ural  chain  of  mountains  is  a  long  one, 
and  its  northern  and  southern  extremities  may 
be  as  wild  and  rugged  as  ancient  descriptions 
represent,  but  the  Middle  Urals,  which  we  crossed, 
are  simply  broad,  unbroken  swellings  of  the  earth, 
and,  though  they  attain  in  one  place  an  altitude 
of  over  4,000  feet,  they  reach  it  by  a  slope  too 
gentle  to  be  perceptible.  We  must  perform  a  rail- 
way journey  equal  to  half  the  length  of  England 
to  gain  an  elevation  of  1,000  feet,  and  in  no  place, 
to  the  eye  of  the  observer,  can  the  mountain-side 
be  distinguished  from  an  undulating  plain. 


^44  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

^  This  region  has  great  attractions  for  the 
Russians  in  its  fertile  soil  and  mineral  wealth, 
and  spread  over  the  slopes  of  the  Middle  Urals 
are  nearly  two  million  settlers.  All  the  platinum 
and  one-fifth  of  the  gold  produced  in  the  whole 
empire  are  obtained  in  this  region ;  and  the 
103  blast-furnaces  between  Ekaterinburg  and 
Perm  supply  two-thirds  of  aU  the  pig-iron  manu- 
factured in  the  country.  Copper  also  is  abundant, 
and  here  at  Ekaterinburg  the  Government  has 
a  mint  for  making  copper  coin. 

This  city  is  one  of  the  most  important  centres 
of  the  Ural  mining  industry.  It  is  well  built, 
occupying  both  sides  of  the  River  Isset,  and  has 
a  population  of  nearly  thirty  thousand.  The 
railway  affords  a  good  view  of  it,  and  its  look 
of  prosperity  and  comfort  Is  not  deceptive,  for 
with  its  numerous  churches,  substantial  houses, 
schools,  hospitals,  orphanage,  and  museum,  it  will 
compare  favourably  a\  ith  any  European  city  of 
equal  size. 

In  addition  to  the  mint,  the  Government  has 
a  factory  here  for  cutting  and  polishing  jasper, 
malachite,  porphyry,  and  other  ornamental 
stones  which  are  met  with  near  the  city.  Many 
of  the  working  people  increase  their  income  by 
doing  a  httle  of  this  kind  of  work  on  their  own 
account.  The  women  and  children  go  out  and 
find  the  stones,  and,  when  they  have  been  carved 


TOMSK  TO  THE  URAL  MOUNTAINS    245 

into  the  shape  of  polar  bears,  wolves,  reindeer, 
and  various  domestic  animals,  the  women  and 
children  take  charge  again,  and  walk  up  and 
down  the  platform  of  the  railway  station,  or 
about  the  streets,  seeking  purchasers  for  these 
specimens  of  Ekaterinburg  produce  and  handi- 
craft. Emeralds,  amethysts,  and  other  precious 
stones  are  also  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  city  ;  and  connected  with  the  railway  station 
is  a  stall,  at  which  Ural  jewellery,  mounted  in 
rings  and  brooches  of  Ural  gold,  may  be  bought 
at  reasonable  prices. 

What  we  saw  of  Ekaterinburg  had  to  be 
accomplished  quickly,  for  after  little  more  than 
an  hour's  delay  our  train  went  on  again.  The 
scenery  was  similar  to  that  which  we  had  already 
passed — woodland,  meadows,  cultivated  fields  ; 
but  no  appearance  anywhere  of  mountains,  nor 
even  of  elevated  ground,  and  we  did  not  pass 
a  single  tunnel,  not  even  deep  cutting,  in  the 
whole  distance  between  Tiumen  and  Perm. 

But  we  were  continually  ascending,  and  in 
the  late  evening  twilight  stopped  at  a  small 
station  bearing  the  great  name  of  '  Asia.'  After 
a  short  run  beyond  it  we  reached  a  precisely 
similar  station,  called  '  Europe.'  Both  stations 
were  built  in  lonely  spots,  the  few  dwelhngs  in 
their  neighbourhood  being  probably  occupied  by 
people  connected  with  the  Hne  ;    but  these  two 


246  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

groups  of  workmen's  houses  are  supposed  to  be 
'the  nuclei  of  future  townships  called  by  these 
high-sounding  names. 

They  are  not  merely  names.  '  Asia  '  is  a 
Siberian  village,  on  the  continent  of  Asia,  and 
must  bear  the  burden  of  the  heavier  charges 
for  telegrams  and  postage  which  it  pleases  the 
Russian  Government  to  impose  upon  its  Siberian 
subjects.  '  Europe,'  though  only  two  miles 
distant,  is  a  European  village,  and  has  all  the 
.^privileges  associated  with  the  name. 

Midway  between  these  two  stations  is  a  marble 
pillar,  of  triangular  section,  which  has  been 
erected  as  a  landmark  by  the  Government,  and 
so  placed  that  the  apex  of  the  triangle  lies  upon 
the  line  of  that  parting  of  the  waters  which 
indicates  the  summit  of  the  Ural  range.  Any 
spring  of  water  bursting  from  the  ground  east- 
ward of  that  line  will  flow  down  the  eastern 
slope  and  connect  itself  with  the  river  systems  of 
Siberia  ;  a  spring  to  the  westward  will  as  surely 
find  its  way  down  the  western  slope  to  join  some 
European  river.  This  line  of  the  parting  of  the 
waters,  therefore,  is  also  the  boundary  line  betAveen 
the  continents ;  and  so  the  marble  pillar  bears, 
on  one  of  the  two  sides  adjacent  to  its  apex,  the 
name  '  Asia,'  and  on  the  other  '  Europe.'  When 
that  pillar  was  behind  me  I  knew  that  I  had 
completed  my  journey  across  Siberia. 


CHAPTER    XII 

CROSSING   THE   RUSSIAN   FRONTIER 

Whatever  dangers,  either  to  liberty  or  life, 
may  be  associated  with  travel  in  Siberia,  it 
seemed  natural  enough  to  think  that,  having 
entered  Europe,  these  were  passed.  But  the 
Russians  are  suspicious  of  strangers,  especially 
of  strangers  from  the  East,  and  I  was  not  yet 
so  safe  as  I  supposed. 

Within  the  confines  of  the  Czar's  dominion 
there  was  no  interference  with  my  movements. 
Saihng  on  the  Kama  and  the  Volga  Rivers,  and 
strolling  through  the  booths  of  the  great  fair  at 
Nijni  Novgorod,  or  round  the  Kreml  at  Moscow, 
or  about  the  streets  and  bridges  of  St.  Petersburg, 
I  was  free — as  free  as  a  bird  is  in  its  cage.  The 
cage  was  in  this  case  a  big  one — as  big  as  the 
Russian  Empire  ;  but,  like  all  other  cages,  it 
presented  to  its  inmates  on  every  side  impassable 
barriers  and  bolted  doors. 

The  Russian  Government  has  no  doubt  some 
excuse  for  the   strictness   of  its  laws,   and  the 

247 


248  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

close  espionage  under  which,  its  subjects  are 
compelled  to  live.  It  is  no  easy  task  to  control 
such  a  great  and  heterogeneous  population — 
Mongols,  Tartars,  Finns,  and  Jews  intermixed, 
but  unassimilated  with  the  Slavonic  people  ; 
and  not  in  Siberia  only,  for  there  are  large  com- 
munities of  Mohammedan  Tartars,  and  even  of 
Mongol  Kalmucks,  in  the  very  heart  of  European 
Russia.  It  is  easier  and  more  usual  for  one  tribe 
to  learn  the  vices  of  another  than  its  virtues,  and 
this  may  account,  in  some  degree,  for  the  pecu- 
Uarly  desperate  character  of  Russian  criminals. 

But  it  is  impossible  to  have  different  sets  of 
laws  for  each  separate  tribe,  and  equally  im- 
possible for  a  despotic  ruler  to  restrain  effectually 
the  evil  passions  of  the  bad  without  imposing 
irksome  restrictions  upon  the  good.  The  meshes 
of  a  net  must  have  their  size  regulated  by  the 
kind  of  fish  we  wish  to  catch  ;  and  the  penal 
laws  of  Russia,  expressly  made  to  hinder  crime, 
appear  to  be  based  on  the  assumption  that  it 
is  better  to  let  ten  who  are  innocent  be  punished 
than  one  who  is  guilty  escape.  But  Russia  is 
growing  fast,  and  she  can  hardly  fail  to  learn  from 
these  experiments,  as  other  Governments  have 
learned  before,  that  the  evils  of  licence  are  less  to 
be  dreaded  than  those  of  tyrannical  repression,  and 
that  only  in  an  atmosphere  of  liberty  can  those 
virtues  flourish  which  make  a  country  truly  great. 


CROSSING  THE  RUSSIAN  FRONTIER    249 

Reaching  the  Lithuanian  city  of  Vilna,  I  took 
a  through-ticket  to  the  nearest  town  in  Germany, 
and  after  a  five  hours'  run  our  train  reached  the 
little  frontier  station  of  Wirballen.  We  had  to 
wait  here  while  passports  were  examined,  and 
detectives  made  a  careful  survey  of  the  passengers, 
lest  any  one  under  the  suspicion  of  the  authorities 
should  slip  out  of  their  hands. 

It  afforded  some  diversion  to  watch  the  process 
of  inspection,  and  I  was  more  amused  than 
frightened  at  the  attention  which  some  of  the 
detectives  paid  to  me.  Then  they  retired  to 
consult,  and  soon  after  a  couple  of  soldiers  and 
an  officer  were  seen  advancing  towards  the  train. 
Evidently,  some  suspect  had  been  discovered. 
As  the  men  were  approaching  directly  towards 
my  carriage,  I  looked  round  searchingly  at  my 
fellow  passengers,  wondering  which  of  them  it 
could  be,  and  was  not  a  little  astonished  when 
the  soldiers  came  straight  up  to  me,  and,  seizing 
my  baggage,  told  me  to  get  out  of  the  train.  As 
soon  as  I  had  alighted  on  the  platform,  the 
guard  gave  his  signal  to  the  engine-driver,  and 
the  train  moved  off. 

The  colonel  who  had  ordered  my  detention  was 
a  cultured  and  gentlemanly  officer,  and  he 
treated  me  with  as  much  courtesy  as  was  possible 
under  the  circumstances.  As  my  passport  had 
been   submitted   to   the   inspection   of   Russian 


250  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

officers  in  every  city,  town,  and  village  at  Vv^hich 
I  had  rested  for  an  hour,  from  one  end  of  the 
Empire  to  the  other,  I  was  not  surprised  at  his 
admission  that  it  was  not  in  any  way  irregular. 
He  would  not  compromise  himself,  nor  hurt 
my  feelings,  by  definitely  stating  the  nature 
and  grounds  of  his  suspicion,  but  M'ould  merely 
say  that  I  had  come  from  Siberia,  that  my  dress 
and  my  general  appearance  told  him  so  apart 
from  my  frank  confession,  and  that  there  were 
circumstances  in  the  case  which  made  it  his  duty 
to  detain  me  until  he  had  received  instructions 
from  head  quarters  at  St.  Petersburg. 

The  soldiers  were  not  so  reticent.  They 
plainly  told  me  that  I  was  not  an  Englishman, 
but  a  Russian  ;  that  my  blundering  way  of 
speaking  the  language  was  a  pretence ;  that 
there  was  reason  to  believe  me  to  be  an  escaped 
exile  ;  and  that  the  passport  produced  by  me 
had  no  doubt  been  taken  from  some  traveller 
whom  I  had  murdered.  When  I  innocently 
called  attention  to  other  proofs  of  my  identity — 
a  banker's  letter  of  credit,  visitmg  cards,  pocket- 
book,  and  correspondence — the  soldiers  gave  a 
knowing  chuckle,  and  replied,  that  of  course 
when  I  took  the  passport  from  the  traveller  I 
took  his  other  papers  too. 

Wirballen,  or,  as  tlie  Russians  call  it,  Verzh- 
bolovo,  is  only  a  small  village,  and  most  of  its 


CROSSING  THE  RUSSIAN  FRONTIER    251 

inhabitants  are  either  persons  employed  on  the 
railway,  or  Government  officials.  The  surround- 
ing country  consists  of  meadow-land  and  corn- 
fields, dotted  here  and  there  with  farmhouses 
and  clumps  of  trees.  I  had  to  sleep  in  the 
waiting-room  at  the  railway  station,  but  was 
allowed  to  walk  about  freely  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  village,  though  no  doubt  under  continual 
observation.  No  food  was  provided  ;  and  as 
my  stock  of  Russian  currency  was  running  low, 
and  could  not  be  easily  replenished  in  a  village 
too  small  to  possess  a  bank,  I  had  to  exercise 
the  most  rigid  economy,  and  be  content  with 
the  homeliest  fare.  Having  purchased  a  big 
loaf  of  bread,  a  slice  from  it  whenever  I  felt 
hungry  enough  to  appreciate  such  wholesome 
dietary,  with  a  drink  of  water  from  a  spring, 
had  to  serve  me  for  my  daily  meals. 

I  went  out  one  day  to  a  little  farmhouse 
near  the  village  in  the  hope  of  being  able  to 
procure  some  milk,  but  rumours  had  got  afloat 
of  the  dangerous  character  who  had  been  arrested 
here,  and  the  people  were  afraid.  Several 
women  were  moving  about  in  the  farmyard 
when  first  I  turned  towards  it,  but  the  place 
was  quite  deserted  v/hen  I  arrived,  and,  though 
I  knocked  at  the  door  and  shouted  for  a  quarter 
of  an  hour,  no  one  ventured  to  appear. 

The  same  evening,  towards  dusk,  when  walking 


252  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

quietly  along  a  country  lane,  I  saw  three  gentle- 
men approaching.  They  were  dressed  as  if 
going  to  a  party,  and  were  engaged  in  such 
earnest  conversation  that  they  did  not  notice 
me  until  they  had  approached  within  a  dozen 
yards,  when  all  at  once,  as  if  panic-struck,  they 
scrambled  up  the  bank  into  the  fields. 

One  morning  I  strolled  on  to  the  highway 
which  crosses  the  frontier  into  Germany.  The 
boundary  line  between  the  two  countries  is 
marked  by  a  deep,  narrow,  grass-covered  gully, 
at  the  bottom  of  which  is  a  ditch.  A  small 
wooden  bridge  connects  the  two  banks,  but 
beyond  the  bridge  on  the  German  side  I  could 
see  nothing,  the  road  turning  abruptly  to  the 
left  behind  a  mass  of  shrubbery  and  trees. 

A  soldier  was  guarding  the  Russian  end  of 
the  bridge,  and  there  were  other  soldiers  in  the 
house  beside  it.  Market  women,  with  baskets 
on  their  arm,  were  crossing  in  one  direction  or 
the  other  frequently.  Each  one  showed  her 
passport  to  the  soldier  and  went  on  ;  but,  as 
soon  as  I  was  spied  upon  the  road,  an  alarm  was 
given,  and  several  soldiers  with  fixed  bayonets 
stood  out  across  the  entrance  to  the  bridge. 
They  had  evidently  been  warned  that  I  might 
attempt  to  get  across  the  frontier  with  a  rush. 
The  span  of  the  bridge  was  only  about  thirty 
feet,  and  if  I  could  reach  the  other  side  of  it 


CROSSING  THE  RUSSIAN  FRONTIER    253 

I  should  be  free  ;  but  it  would  be  madness  for 
any  one  whose  life  is  not  already  forfeited  to  face 
the  risks  of  such  a  rush.  '  I  only  want  to  look 
at  the  bridge,'  I  said.  '  But  you  cannot  be 
allowed  to  look,'  the  officer  in  charge  replied, 
*  and  must  at  once  go  off  this  road.' 

Not  being  sufficiently  interested  in  the  skilful 
marksmanship  of  Russian  soldiers  to  lend  myself 
as  a  target  for  their  rifle-practice,  I  retraced  my 
steps. 

Life  in  Wirballen  was  becoming  somewhat 
monotonous.  I  had  watched  the  coming  and 
going  of  the  trains  at  the  station,  explored  every 
street  and  alley  of  the  village,  and  there  appeared 
to  be  no  interesting  occupation  left.  But  when 
I  asked  permission  to  return  to  St.  Petersburg 
or  som«  other  Russian  town,  they  told  me  in 
reply,  that  if  I  would  be  patient  for  a  few  days 
longer  I  should  probably  find  myself  on  my  way 
back  to  Siberia. 

The  British  Embassy  at  St.  Petersburg,  in 
reply  to  a  telegram  of  mine,  returned  a  prompt 
promise  of  assistance  ;  but  the  Russian  police 
insisted  upon  such  a  complete  investigation, 
extending  as  far  back  as  the  remotest  Siberian 
settlements,  that,  though  the  inquiries  were 
made  by  telegraph,  they  involved  a  considerable 
expenditure  of  time  ;  and  it  was  not  until  the 
evening  of    the  third  day  that  the  colonel  in- 


254  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

formed  me,  by  a  note  in  French,  that  a  message 
had  just  arrived  from  St.  Petersburg  ordering 
my  release,  and  that  I  was  at  liberty  to  cross 
the  frontier  whenever  I  wished. 

Naturally,  I  wished  to  do  it  there  and  then. 
If  the  cage-door  is  open,  the  sooner  one  gets 
outside  the  better,  lest  it  should  close  again. 
As  no  train  was  leaving  for  the  West  until  the 
following  morning,  I  hired  a  cart,  and  at  once 
set  out  for  the  German  railway  station  at  Eydt- 
kuhnen.  As  we  turned  into  the  road  which 
leads  to  the  frontier,  the  sentry  at  the  bridge 
again  gave  the  alarm,  and  the  soldiers  ran  out 
from  the  house  to  block  the  passage.  Waving 
the  letter  in  my  hand,  I  told  the  driver  to 
go  on,  but  we  were  forced  to  stop  at  a  con- 
siderable distance  from  the  bridge  while  the 
epistle  was  examined.  It  was  passed  from  one 
to  another,  and  they  all  declared  it  to  be  a 
forgery.  In  vain  I  protested,  and  in  vain  the 
driver  helped  me.  The  only  favour  the  soldiers 
could  be  persuaded  to  allow,  was  to  let  one  of 
their  number  go  with  me  to  the  colonel  for  a 
verbal  confirmation  of  the  note. 

A  soldier  joined  me  in  the  cart,  and  back  we 
went  to  the  town  again.  The  delay  was  vexing, 
and  all  the  more  so  because  I  had  hoped  to 
catch  a  train  which  was  that  night  leaving  the 
German   station   for   Berlin.     But   this  was  not 


CROSSING  THE  RUSSIAN  FRONTIER    255 

the  last  of  my  vexations.  In  springing  from  the 
cart  at  the  officer's  residence  a  projecting  nail 
caught  the  soldier's  trousers  and  gave  them  an 
ugly  tear,  so  the  man  sprang  back  again  into 
the  cart,  made  the  driver  move  on  a  few  hundred 
paces,  and  declared  that  he  would  not  present 
himself  before  the  colonel  until  his  torn  garment 
was  repaired.  The  carter  borrowed  a  needle 
and  thread  from  a  roadside  cottage  ;  and  while 
I  endeavoured,  with  indifferent  success,  to  look 
on  with  equanimity,  the  soldier  proceeded  de- 
liberately to  stitch  up  the  long  rent.  Then  we 
went  in  to  see  the  colonel. 

He  did  not,  of  course,  repudiate  his  letter,  so 
we  were  soon  on  our  way  to  the  bridge  once  more. 
There  I  had  to  wait  for  half  an  hour  while  the 
officer  in  charge  took  a  copy  of  my  passport, 
and  wrote  out  a  description  of  my  dress  and 
appearance.  Then  I  received  permission  to 
proceed ;  and  when  the  hollow  beat  of  the 
horse's  hoofs  upon  the  bridge  told  me  that  I 
was  outside  the  cage  at  last,  I  felt  inclined  to 
give  expression  to  my  feelings  by  an  English 
cheer.  But  just  then,  at  the  bend  of  the  road, 
I  was  confronted  by  two  tall  German  soldiers, 
and  for  a  few  moments  seemed  in  danger  of 
being  a  sort  of  shuttlecock  between  the  keepers 
of  the  two  ends  of  the  bridge. 
'[_  But  as  soon  as  the  German  soldiers  knew  my 


256  ACROSS    SIBERIA 

nationality  they  handed  back  my  passport,  would 
not  trouble  me  to  open  my  portmanteau,  said 
that,  if  I  had  come  across  Siberia,  I  must  have 
had  already  my  full  share  of  annoyances  ;  and, 
telling  the  carter  to  drive  on,  they  shouted  after 
me  their  wish  that  I  might  have  a  quick  and 
pleasant  journey  home  to  England. 
And  so  I  had. 


Printed  and  hound  by  Hazell,  WaUon  £  Viney,  Ld.,  London  and  Aylesbury. 


'UNIVERSITY  OV 


*  5?       "x,  v.— ^^ 


^•OFCAlll 


diH^    "^^Aavaa 


-r     o 
9    ^ 


-UNIVER%       A>:10SANC 


<rii3DNvsoi^      "^^/smm 


AMUNIVERy//, 

■':c:.wrFirf-. 

•"HIBRARYOa 

^^^UIBRA 

g)  .^^' 

i    iTi 

^1    f 

, 

07 

^     L_      n    g 

C_3         1 1 

sV^T^S 

i© 

-^v.j,„n.,j..' 

%OJI1VJJO^ 

^UC.IIMIWCDC/v 

^lOSANCElfj}x 

^OFCALIFO^^ 

.^.OFCAlIf 

-^1 

iVrYi 

5  Mr 

'J  IJJllT    J\J  I      ■ 

^'JUJ/\lllll  3U' 

«^HIBRARYO/^       <^HIBRARY»r.         aWEONIVER%       ^mM 

ii  irri  Si  irrs  Si<xr5  lOr 


•^x 


<r?l3DNVS01^ 


AWEUNIVER^/a 


o 


^tllBRARYQA 


'^m\mi^ 


^-OFCAilFO/?^ 


%a3AiNa-3i 


^lOSANCEl^ 
o 


3  1158  01147  0753 


■S3 


;  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  UBRARY  FACIUTY 


S  1  AA 


<rii30Nvsm^      "^/saaAin 


^^WEUNIVERJ/A       ^lOSAN 


'^omm^'^      '^omwf^       ^nwmm^    "^^mm 


.^WEUNIVERS"//) 


.vWSANCElfj}> 

o 


aWEUNIVERJ//- 


A>:lOSANCElfx^ 

o 


-^HIBRARYQ^ 


<^mh 


^QijoNvsoi^'^     "^/^iiJAiNn-av^**      ^^m\m\^ 


^OFCAIIFO/?^ 


<r7i3DNvsm^      '^/^a^AiNn^VkV^       ^^Auvaan-^ 


^^o-m'i 


<^m^mOA.       ^lUBRARYa^-  <^^MEUNIVER%       ^lOSAN 

^\\n%  ^\\r:%    g^o^^  t/^ 


